 

Dearest Father

Franz Kafka

Translated by
Hannah and Richard Stokes

ax

2 ot
i

ONEWORLD
CLASSICS.

 
 f

Contents

 

( Introduction 7
Dearest Father 15
Extracts from Kafka’s Diaries 87
Extracts from Kafka’s Letters 101
; : Note on the Texts 108 —*
a Notes 108

ONEWORLD CLASSICS LTD
London House

243-253 Lower Mortlake Road
Richmond

Surrey TW9 2LL

United Kingdom
www.oneworldclassics.com

Le Dearest Father first published as Brief an den Vater in 1953

a English Translation © Hannah and Richard Stokes, 2008

5 First published by Oneworld Classics Limited in 2008

Notes and Introduction © Hannah and Richard Stokes, 2008
Front cover image © Corbis

Printed in Great Britain by CPI Cox & Wyman, Reading, Berkshire

ISBN: 978-1-84749-025-4

All the material in this volume are reprinted with permission or presumed to be
in the public domain, Every effort has been made to ascertain and acknowledge

their copyright status, but should there have been any unwitting oversight on our
part, we would be happy to rectify the error in subsequent printings.

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in or
introduced into a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means
(electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise), without the prior
es written permission of the publisher, This book is sold subject to the condition that
+ it shall not be resold, lene, hired out or otherwise circulated without the express
prior consent of the publisher. : -

 

 
  

 

Introduction

Like much of Kafka’s work, Brief an den Vater (Dearest
Father) provides interesting insight into the author’s attitudes
to law and order. Kafka often described his relationship
with his father, Hermann Kafka, as a “Prozess” (“trial”), and
legal terms such as “Urteil” (“judgment” or “sentence”) and
“Schuld” (“guilt”) feature repeatedly in the letter. When he
sent it to his mistress, Milena Jesensk4, Kafka himself wrote:
“Und verstehe beim Lesen alle advokatorischen Knife, es ist ein
Advokatenbrief.”* (“As you read it, try to understand all the
lawyerly tricks, after all it is a lawyer's letter”). Kafka was
interested in systems of social control, and in the Brief he
criticizes his father as ruler and judge of the family. Kafka
finds fault with the inconsistency of Hermann’s system: “Dz
[musstest] gar nicht konsequent sein und doch nicht aufhortest
Recht zu haben.”* (“You did not even have to be at all con-
sistent, and could still never be wrong”). In so doing he usurps
the judicial role and gains intellectual supremacy over his
father. If his argument appears aggressive, however, we are

reminded by its written medium that Kafka was too timid

7

 
 "Page 3

to address his father face to face — in direct confrontation,
Hermann would interrupt and throw him off course. Even
in writing, Kafka confesses not entirely to have been able to
express his argument, which is as inconsistent as the system it
attacks. He admits (whether or not in earnest) to deliberately
angering his father and at times defends Hermann: “Dz
wirktest so auf mich, wie Du wirken musstest,”* (“Your effect
on me was the effect you could not help having”). Kafka’s
tone changes as often as his standpoint: a sober description
of the son’s banishment to a distant world of subservience
is directly preceded by a comically grotesque depiction of
the father digging in his ears with a toothpick and sending
scraps of food flying. These oscillations of argument and
tone, combined with a highly idiosyncratic approach to
punctuation (discussed below), undermine any assertion
that the letter is an “Advokatenbrief”. It lacks the requisite
persuasion and reasonableness.

And so the letter. presents systems of law and order in a
chaotic way. Thomas Anz appears to notice this fusion of
order and chaos when he distinguishes between the two
thematic levels of the letter. Its surface structure is controlled.
‘Themes are dealt with one by one and include “upbringing,
business, Judaism, [Kafka’s] existence as a writer, occupation,
sexuality and marriage”. In the former three of these

sections, Kafka criticizes the examples that his father set:

 

Page 3

hypocritically subjecting others to rules that he himself never
followed; treating his employees appallingly; and neglecting
the religious traditions that were important to his son.” In
the latter four sections, Kafka explores his own self-loathing,
which stems from his inability to equal his father either by
succeeding financially or by founding his own family. Try
as he might to impose structure on his thoughts, however,
he does not fully confront, analyse or communicate certain
underlying issues identified by Anz (“anxiety and guilt,
accusations and condemnations, freedom and power, art-
istry and profession, sexuality”).” These unresolved issues
dominate much. of Kafka’s literary output and day-to-day
correspondence. They bleed into each of the letter’s seven
proposed thematic sections, subtly undermining the author's
superficial assertion of structure and rationality.

At first glance the letter may appear to document Kafka’s
exploration of his own insecurities, and his finding their
origins in his relationship with his domineering father. As
already mentioned, however, the conclusions he draws are not
entirely reliable. He wrote the Brief in November 1919 at'a
sanatorium in Schelesen, while recovering from tuberculosis,
which had been diagnosed the previous year. At thirty-six,
he was just four years away from death. Kafka’s illness,

coupled with the recent breakdown of his relationship with

Julie Wohryzek (his second significant lover), may well have

 
 Page 4

agitated his mind and increased his self-confessed tendency
to exaggerate.

It is unclear whether the letter was ever truly intended
for the eyes of Hermann Kafka. After writing it by hand,
Kafka made a second typed copy (minus the last few pages).
He later annotated it in places, with the intention of having
it proofread by Milena. Kafka asked his mother to forward
one copy to his father — but she could not bring herself to
deliver it, and this may have been exactly what the son had
hoped for. The Brief was part of the bundle of fragments
and letters that Kafka entrusted to Max Brod on his death.
The instruction was to burn everything; of course, the friend
famously published it all, and the whole letter first appeared
in 1953.

Kafka’s insecurities and motives for writing the letter seem
very real. But the work’s thematic stylization, its duplication
and proofreading, and its failure to reach its addressee are
not reminiscent of usual letter-writing practice. Perhaps this
is why Brod. published the letter with a collection of fictional
short stories,” and not with Kafka’s autobiographical mate-
rial. Interestingly, the letter bears many similarities to Kafka’s

earlier fictional work, Das Urteil (1912). This story describes a

confrontation between its protagonist Georg Bendemann and *

his father, triggered when the father reads a letter written by

the son. The story begins with the son poised to acquire a

10

 

Page 4

wife and enter adulthood, the father réady to die. The father
prevents this natural handover of familial power, however,
by forbidding Georg to marry (“Ich fege sie dir von der Seite
weg”* (“T'll sweep her away from your side”)), and using his
last vestige of paternal authority to sentence Georg to death.
Some of this occurs in the Brief an den Vater. Kafka holds
his father in part responsible for his own failure to marry
and enter true adulthood. Meanwhile, Bendemann Senior’s
disapproval of Georg’s fiancée — “weil sie die Rocke so gehoben
hat, die widerliche Gans”* (“because she hitched up her skirts,
like this, the disgusting cow”) — is reminiscent of Hermann’s
commient about Kafka’s fiancée (Felice Bauer): in the Brief:
“Sie hat wahrscheinlich irgendeine ausgesuchte Bluse angezogen,
wie das die Prager Jiidinnen verstehn”* (“She probably put on
some sort of fancy blouse, as only those Prague Jewesses
know how”). Like Georg, furthermore, Franz falls to piéces
in face-to-face conflict with his father. And so in writing
about Georg’s death, Kafka was perhaps anticipating his
own father’s reaction to the real-life Brief. He admitted the
autobiographical significance of Das Urteil in a private diary
entry: “Georg hat so viele Buchstaben wie Franz... Bende aber
hat ebenso viele Buchstaben wie Kafka...”* (“Georg has the
sane number of letters as Franz... Bende has exactly as many
letters as Kafka”). Even if the letter’s narrative is true, much

of it was first rehearsed in fiction.

1

 
  

 

 

Page 5

The letter’s ambiguous position between fact and fiction,
order and chaos, makes it a fascinating subject for translation.
Here it is worth considering two questions: How far can any
piece of writing be purely factual and objective? And how far
should translators seek to impose order on a text whose chaos
is integral to its meaning? First, the question of objectivity.
No “factual” writing is without an element of fiction. Even
if Kafka had intended the letter to be a true representation
of events, its composition would have involved some inter-
pretation and translation — the author first forming a biased
and: retrospective view of his childhood, then ordering his
thoughts and emotions, and then converting them into words
on paper. Much information would have been lost and created
in these transformations, and what appears on the page could
not be a purely factual reproduction of original events. By
confessing to indulge in further creative exaggeration, Kafka
is arguably embracing the fictional element of his writing
and encouraging the reader to acknowledge his identity as
a writer (an identity with which he struggled, according to
Anz).* Translators in turn must be aware that, although they
attempt to recapture the original text accurately, they will
inevitably transform it further. How much transformation
is desirable here? This leads to the second question: that of
orderliness. The Brief contains awkward patterns of syntax

and repetition, idiosyncratic use of punctuation and numerous

12

 

Page 5

other irregularities. Although Kafka uses only the simplest of
words, he arranges them in complex ways to create obscure
linguistic effects and produce a text that is often ambiguous.
Perhaps these effects are deliberate and intended to put the
reader ill at ease. Or perhaps Kafka meant to express himself
clearly but was prevented by his illness and emotional in-
stability. Whatever their cause or purpose, the irregularities
leave translators in a quandary: should they tidy up Kafka’s
awkwardness and gloss it for the reader, or rather attempt
to preserve it in translation? It is commonly held that a good
translation should read smoothly and idiomatically, as if the
text were written in English originally. A reader should not
expect to have to stumble through a clumsy translation. But
where that clumsiness is crucial to the essence of the original,
surely it would be insensitive to remove it? Rewriting the
Brief in refined, consistent or idiomatic English will under-
mine the awkwardness of Kafka’s fevered, fermented Ger-
man original and do an injustice to its emotional content. In
this instance we must therefore break some of the laws of

translation, in an attempt to satisfy the demands of the text.

— Hannah and Richard Stokes, 2008

13
 Hannah Stokes read German and French at Emmanuel Col-
lege, Cambridge. There she studied Kafka’s Briefan den Vater
under the guidance of Dr Michael Minden, to whom she is
most grateful. She went on to study law and is now a trainee

solicitor. This is her first book.

Richard Stokes is Visiting Professor of Lieder at the Royal
Academy of Music in London. He has published a number
of books on French, German and Spanish Song, including

The Book of Lieder — the original texts of over 1000 songs with

parallel translations, and an introduction by Ian Bostridge
(Faber, 2005).

 

Dearest Father

 
  

 

Schelesen

Dearest Father,

You asked me recently why I claim tobe afraid of you. Idid not
know, as usual, how to answer, partly for the very reason that
I am afraid of you, partly because an explanation of my fear
would require more details than I could even begin to make
coherent in speech. And if I now try to answer in writing it
will still be nowhere near complete, because even in writing
my fear and its consequences raise a barrier between us and
because the magnitude of material far exceeds my memory
and my understanding.

To you the matter always seemed very simple, at least in as
far as you spoke about it in front of me and, indiscriminately,
in front of many others. To you it seemed like this: you had
worked hard your whole life, sacrificed everything for your
children, particularly me, as a result I lived “like a lord”, had
complete freedom to study whatever I wanted, knew where
my next meal was coming from and therefore had no reason
to worry about anything; for this you asked no gratitude, you

know how children show their gratitude, but at least some kind

17

 
 Page 8

of cooperation, a sign of sympathy; instead I would always hide
away from you in my room, buried in books, with crazy friends
and eccentric ideas; we never spoke openly, I never came up to
you in the synagogue, I never visited you in Franzensbad,* nor
otherwise had any sense of family, I never took an interest in the
business or your other concerns, I saddled you with the factory
and then left you in the lurch, I encouraged Ottla’s* obstinacy
and while I have never to this day lifted a finger to help you (I
never even buy you the occasional theatre ticket), I do all I can
for perfect strangers. If you summarize your judgment of me,
it is clear that you do not actually reproach me with anything
really indecent or malicious (with the exception, perhaps, of
my latest marriage plans), but rather with coldness, alienation,
ingratitude. And, what is more, you reproach me as if it were
my fault, as if I might have been able to arrange everything
differently with one simple change of direction, while you are
not in the slightest to blame, except perhaps for having been
too good to me.

This, your usual analysis, I agree with only in so far as I also
believe you to be entirely blameless for our estrangement. But
I too am equally and utterly blameless. If I could bring you
to acknowledge this, then — although a new life would not be
possible, for that we are both much too old — there could yet
be a sort of peace, not an end to your unrelenting reproaches,

but at least a mitigation of them.

 

Page 8

Strangely enough, you seem to have some idea of what I

mean. This might have been why you recently said to me, “I
have always been fond of you; if, on the outside, I have not
treated you as fathers usually treat their children, it.is just
because'I cannot pretend as others can.” Now, Father, I have
on the whole never doubted your goodness towards me, but
this statement I consider wrong. You cannot pretend, that
is true, but purely for this reason to claim that other fathers
pretend was either sheer indisputable bigotry, or — and this,
in my view, is more plausible — a veiled way of saying that
something is wrong between us, and that you are partly
responsible for it, albeit through no fault of your own. If this
is what you really meant, then we are agreed.

I am not saying, of course, that I have become what I am
purely under your influence. That would be a very great
exaggeration (although I do have a tendency to exaggerate).
It is very possible that, had I grown up entirely free of your
influence, I still could not have become a person after your
own heart. I would probably still have become a weak,
anxious, hesitant, restless person, neither Robert Kafka nor
Karl Hermann,* yet still very different from what I am
today, and we would have been able to get on very well.
I would have been happy to have you as a friend, a boss,
an uncle, a grandfather, even indeed (though rather more

hesitantly) as a father-in-law. It is only as a father that you

19

 
 Page 9

were too strong for me, particularly since my brothers died
young and my sisters did not come along until much later,
so I had to endure the initial conflicts all alone, for which I
was far too weak.

Compare the two of us: me, to put it very briefly, a Lowy*
with a certain Kafka core that is simply not driven by the
Kafka will to live, prosper and conquer, but by a Léwy-like
force that moves more secretly, more timidly, in a different
direction, and which often breaks down completely. You, by
contrast, a true Kafka in strength, health, appetite, loudness
of voice, eloquence, self-satisfaction, worldly superiority,
stamina, presence of mind, understanding of human nature,
a certain generosity, of course with all the faults and weak-
nesses that go with these advantages, into which you are
driven by your natural disposition and sometimes your hot
temper. Perhaps you are not wholly a Kafka in your general
worldly outlook, in as far as I can compare you with Uncles
Philipp, Ludwig and Heinrich.” That is odd, and here the
picture is no clearer. However, they were all cheerier, fresher,
more casual, more relaxed, less strict than you. (In this respect,

incidentally, I have inherited much from you and have taken

far too great a care of that inheritance, admittedly without

having the necessary counter-qualities that you do.) Yet on
the other hand, you too have gone through various phases in

this respect, you were perhaps cheerier before your children

 

Page 9

(I especially) disappointed and depressed you at home (you
were quite different when visitors came), and you have
perhaps become cheerier again, now that your grandchildren
and your son-in-law show you some of the warmth that your
own children, except perhaps Valli,” never could.

In any case, we were so different, and in our differences
such. a danger to each other that, had anyone wanted to
predict how I, the slowly developing child, and you, the
fully-grown man, would behave towards one another, they
could have presumed that you would simply trample me
underfoot until nothing of me remained. Well, that did not
happen, what happens in life cannot be predicted, but maybe
something even worse happened. In saying this, I ask you not
to forget that I in no way find you guilty. Your effect on me
was the effect you could not help having, but you should stop
considering it some particular perversity on my part that I
succumbed to that effect.

I was an anxious child, and yet I am sure I was also
disobedient, as children are, I am sure that Mother spoilt
me too, but I cannot believe that I was particularly difficult
to handle, I cannot believe that you, by directing a friendly
word my way, by quietly taking my hand or by giving me a
kind look, could not have got everything you wanted from
me. And you are fundamentally a kind and. tender person

(what follows does not contradict that, after all it refers

21

 
 Page 10

only to how I saw you as a child) but not every child has the
tenacity and fearlessness to search until he finds the kindness
within. You, Father, are only capable of treating a child with
the same means by which you were moulded, with vigour,
noise and fits of rage, and in my case you found these means
especially appropriate because you wanted to bring me up to
-be a strong, courageous boy.

Of course, I cannot accurately recall and describe your way
of bringing me up in the very early years, but I can form some
idea of it, drawing on my more recent experience and on your
treatment of Felix. In doing this I am increasingly aware
that you were younger then, therefore fresher, wilder, more
natural and carefree than you are today, and that in addition
you were largely occupied with the business, meaning you
barely had time to see me once a day, so the impression you
made on me would have been all the greater, and virtually
impossible for me to become accustomed to.

There is only one episode from those early years that I
remember directly, perhaps you remember it too. I was

whining persistently for water one night, certainly not because

I was thirsty, but in all probability partly to be annoying,

partly to amuse myself. After a number of fierce threats had
failed, you lifted me out of my bed, carried me out onto the
paviatche* and left me awhile all alone, standing outside the

locked door in my nightshirt. I do not mean to say that this

 

Page 10

was wrong of you, perhaps at that time there really was no
other way of having a peaceful night, but I mention it as a
characteristic example of the way you brought me up and
the effect it had on me. This incident almost certainly made
me obedient for a time, but it damaged me on the inside. I
was by nature unable to reconcile the simple act (as it seemed
to me) of casually asking for water with the utter horror of
being carried outside. Years later it still tormented me that

this giant man, my father, the ultimate authority, could enter

my room at any time and, almost unprovoked, carry me from

my bed out onto the pavlatche, and that I meant so little to
him.

That was merely the beginning of things, but this feeling
of powerlessness which still regularly overcomes me (in other
respects admittedly a noble and productive feeling) stems in
many ways from how you treated me. What I needed was a
little encouragement, a little friendliness, a little help to keep
my future open, instead you obstructed it, admittedly with
the good intention of persuading me to go down a different
path. But I was nor fit for the path you chose. You encouraged
me, for example, whenever I saluted or marched well, but I
was no budding soldier, or you encouraged me when I could
bring myself to eat heartily, especially when I drank beer, or
when I managed to sing songs that I did not understand, or

to parrot your own favourite clichés back to you, but none

23

 
 Page 11

of it had a place in my future. And even today, it is typical of
you only to encourage me in something when it engages your
interest, when your own self-esteem is at stake, threatened
either by me (for example with my marriage plans) or by
others through me (for example when Pepa* insults me).
Then you give me encouragement, remind me of what I am
worth, what sort of woman I could marry, and condemn Pepa
out of hand. But apart from the fact that I am, even at my
present age, already virtually impervious to encouragement,
Ihave to ask myself what good it could do me anyway, as it is
only ever offered when I am not its primary object.

At that time, and throughout all that time, what I really
needed was encouragement. I was already weighed down by
your sheer bodily presence. I remember, for example, how we
often undressed together in the same cubicle. I skinny, frail,
fragile, you strong, tall, thickset. Even in the cubicle I felt
a puny wretch, and not only in front of you but in front of
the whole world, because for me you were the measure of all
things. But when we stepped out before all the people, I with
my hand in yours, a little skeleton, unsteady and barefoot on
the planks, afraid of the water, unable to copy your swimming
strokes which you kept on demonstrating with the best of
intentions but actually to my profound shame, then I would
lose myself in despair and at such moments all my past failures

would come back to haunt me. I felt happiest when you

 

Page 11

sometimes undressed first and I could stay in the cubicle alone
and delay the shame of my public appearance until you finally
came looking for me and forced me to leave the cubicle. I was
thankful to you for seeming not to sense my despair, besides,
I was proud of my father’s body. Incidentally, this difference
between us remains much the same to this day.

Your intellectual domination had a similar effect on me.
You had reached such heights, solely by your own efforts, that
you had unbounded confidence in your own opinions. That
was nowhere near so dazzling for me as a child, as it was for
me later as a maturing young man. In your armchair you
ruled the world, Your opinion was right, any other was mad,
eccentric, meshugge,* not normal. In fact, your self-confidence
was so great that you did not even have to be at all consistent,
and could still never be wrong. It was even possible for you
to have no opinion whatsoever on a matter, and in such cases
all potential opinions on that matter had to be wrong without
exception. You might rail against the Czechs, for example,
then the Germans, then the Jews, and not only selectively but

in all respects, and by the end of it you would be the only one

left standing. You took on, for me, that enigmatic quality of

all tyrants whose right to rule is founded on their identity
rather than on reason. At least, it seemed that way to me.
Now, where I was concerned, you were in fact astonishingly

often right, not only in conversation (and this would not have

25

 
 Page 12

been surprising, for we hardly ever conversed), but also in
reality. Although even that was not especially difficult to
understand. I suffered, after all, in my every thought under
intense pressure from you, even (and in fact especially) where
my thoughts were completely different from yours. All these
thoughts that seemed independent of you buckled from
the outset under the burden of your derogatory judgments;
for me to endure this and still to achieve the complete and
lasting development of any thought was virtually impossible.
Iam not talking here of any lofty thoughts, rather of every
little childhood undertaking. I had only to be happy about
something or other, be inspired by it, come home and mention
it and your response was an ironic sigh, a shake of the head,
a finger rapping the table: “Is that what all the fuss is about?”
or “I wish I had your worries!” or “What a waste of time!”
or “That's nothing!” or “That won’t put food on the table!”
Naturally one could not expect you to be enthusiastic about
every childish triviality, since you had your own worries. Even
that was not the point. The point was rather that, thanks to
your antagonistic nature, you disappointed the child with
such determination and principle, and your antagonism
constantly intensified as it accumulated material, until it
became a permanent habit, even when your opinion was for
once the same as mine, and these childhood disappointments

were'by the end not just everyday disappointments; but, since

26

 

Page 12

they concerned you, the measure of all things, they struck me
to the very heart. Courage, resolution, confidence or delight
in this and that could not long survive if you opposed it, or
even if I could safely assume that you would oppose it; and
this I could assume in practically every case.

This applied to people as well as thoughts. I only had to
take a litele interest in someone — which, given my nature,
did not happen very often — for you, without any respect for
my feelings or judgment, to weigh in with insults, slander
and humiliation. Victims included such innocent, childlike
people as the Yiddish actor Léwy.* Before you even knew
him you compared him, in some dreadful way that I have
already forgotten, to vermin and, as so often with people
dear to me, you automatically had that proverb of the dogs
and fleas* to hand. Here I remember the actor in particular
because I made a note of what you said about him at the time:
“This is how my father speaks about my friend (whom he
does not even know), simply because he is my friend. I will
always be able to reproach him with this whenever he accuses
me of lacking a child’s love and gratitude”. I was never able
to understand your complete obliviousness to the kind of
grief and shame you could inflict on me with your words and
judgments, it was as if you had no idea of your power. There
can be no doubt that I, too, often hurt you with my words,

but then I was always aware of it, it pained me but I could not

27

 

 
  

 

Page 13

restrain myself, could not suppress the words, I would regret
them even as I uttered them. You, on the other hand, lashed
out with yours without a second thought, you felt sorry for
nobody, either during or afterwards, people were left utterly
defenceless.
But that was the way you brought me up. You have, I think,
a gift for bringing up children; and such an upbringing could
certainly have benefited someone like you; such a person
would have grasped the reasoning behind what you told him,
would not have concerned himself with other things and
would quietly have done your bidding. For me as a child,
though, everything you barked at me was as good as God’s
law, I never forgot it, it remained for me the most important
means for judging the world, above all for judging you, and
there you failed completely. Since as a child I was with you
mainly at mealtimes, your lessons were for the most part
lessons on correct table manners. Whatever was brought to
the table had to be eaten up, the quality of the food was not to
be mentioned — you, though, often found the meal uneatable,
called it “swill”, the “beast” (the cook) had ruined it. Because
you, driven by your own predilection and sizeable appetite,
ate everything fast, hot and in large mouthfuls, the child had
to hurry, gloomy silence reigned at the table, interrupted by
admonitions: “First eat, then speak” or “Faster, faster, faster”

or “Look, see, I finished ages ago”. We were not allowed

28

 

 

 

Page 13

to crunch bones, you were. We were not allowed to slurp
vinegar, you were. The main thing was for the bread to be
cut straight; but that you did so with a knife dripping with
gravy was irrelevant. We had to take care not to let any scraps
fall onto the floor, in the end they lay mostly under your
seat. At the table we were to do nothing except eat, but you
cleaned and trimmed your fingernails, sharpened pencils,
dug in your ears with your toothpick. Please understand me
correctly, Father, these would in themselves have been utterly
insignificant details, they only came to depress me because
they meant that you, a figure of such tremendous authority
for me, did not yourself abide by the commandments you
imposed. Hence there were for me three worlds, one where
I lived, a slave under laws that had been invented solely for
me and, moreover, with which I could never fully comply
(I did not know why), then another world, infinitely distant
from mine, in which you dwelt, busy with ruling, issuing
orders and being angry when they were not obeyed, and
finally a third realm where everybody else lived happily, free
from orders and obligation. I was forever in disgrace, either
I obeyed your orders, which was a disgrace for they applied,
after all, only to me; or I was defiant, that was also a disgrace,
for how dare I presume to defy you, or my reason for failing
to obey was that I lacked, for example, your strength, your

appetite, your aptitude, although you expected it of me as a

29

 
   
  
  
   
   
  
  

   

Page 14

matter of course; that was, in fact, the greatest disgrace of all.
This was not how I thought as a child, but rather how I felt.

I see my situation at that time more clearly, perhaps, if
I compare it with Felix’s.* You treat him in a similar way,
indeed you even employ a particularly fearful method of
upbringing against him in that, whenever at mealtimes he
does something you consider unclean, you do not content
yourself, as you would with me, by saying, “What a pig
you are,” but add “A true Hermann,” or “Just like your
father.” Now, this may perhaps — one cannot say more than
“perhaps” — not really harm Felix a great deal, since for him
you are no more than a grandfather, albeit an especially
important one, certainly not everything as you were for me,
moreover Felix is a quiet, even already to some extent manly
character who may be bewildered by a thunderous voice, but
not permanently affected by it, and above all he is relatively
seldom in your company, he is subject to other influences,
you are for him rather something of a lovable curiosity from
whom he can pick and choose whatever he wants. For me
you were nothing like a curiosity, I could not pick or choose,
I had to accept everything.

And, what is more, without being able to voice any objection,
for you are completely incapable of having a calm discussion on
any topic that you do not approve of, or indeed one that you have

not yourself raised; your imperious temperament prohibits it.

       
  
      
     
   
    
      
   
     
     
     
     
   
     
     
 
  
  
  
  
 
  
   
 
  
  

Page 14

In recent years you have blamed this on your heart condition, in

  

reality I do not know that you were ever any different, your heart
condition. is at the very least a means by which you dominate
more absolutely, as the mere thought of it is enough to stifle
any contradiction. Naturally I am not reproaching you for this,
Iam merely establishing a fact. You used to say for example:
“There is simply no reasoning with her,” she flies in your face
regardless”, but in fact it was never she who attacked first; you
tend to confuse issues with people; the issue under discussion
flies in your face and you react to it without even listening to
the person; whatever is said with hindsight can only aggravate
you further, never change your mind. All you can then say is:
“Do what you want; as far as ’m concerned it’s your choice;
you're old enough; it’s not for me to give you advice” — and all

that spoken with the awful hoarse undertone of anger and utter

  
 

condemnation that admittedly makes me shudder less today

  
  
  
  
  
 

-than in my childhood, but only because the sense of guilt that so
pervasively consumed me asa child has since been superseded in
art by insight into the helplessness we shared.

Our inability to get on calmly had one more very natural
onsequence: I lost the ability to speak. I probably never would

have turned out to be a great speaker in any case, but | would

 
   
  

However, you forbade me to speak from a very early age:

your threat, “Not a word in contradiction!” together with the

 

 
  

Page 15

image of your raised hand, has haunted me ever since I can
remember. In your presence — for you are, when on familiar
ground, an excellent speaker ~I stuttered and spluttered, that
angered you too, in the end I stopped speaking, perhaps at
first in defiance, but gradually because I really was no longer
able to think or speak in your presence. And because you were
present throughout my upbringing, this went on to affect
every aspect of my life. In any case, you are curiously mistaken
if you believe that I was bent on disobeying you. “Persistent
contrariness” was really never my guiding principle where
you were concerned, as you believe and reproach me for. On
the contrary: if I had tried less hard to follow you, I am sure
you would have been much more satisfied with the result.
As it is, the steps you took to discipline me always hit their
target; I could never escape you; what I have now become,
I have become (excepting my innate disposition and any
external influences, of course) through the combination of
your upbringing and my obedience. If the result embarrasses
you in spite of this, if you unconsciously refuse to accept that
it is the result of your upbringing, then it is precisely because

your method and my substance were at such odds with one
another. When you said, “Not a word in contradiction!” you

meant only to silence in me that opposition which you found

objectionable, but your influence in this respect was much

too strong for me, I was too obedient, I fell completely silent,

32

 

Page 15

crept anxiously away from you and only dared speak when
I was so far away that your power could no longer reach
me, at least not directly. You looked on and saw deliberate
“contrariness” in everything, but in reality it was only an
inevitable consequence of your strength and my weakness.

The rhetorical devices you used in bringing me up, which
were extremely effective, and at least in my case never
failed, included: insults, threats, irony, spiteful laughter and
— strangely — self-pity.

I cannot remember your ever having abused me directly
or explicitly. Nor was that necessary, you had so many other
methods, and besides, conversation at home, or particularly
in the shop, brought the abuses you directed at others flying
around my head in such abundance that I was sometimes
almost stunned by them as a young boy, and had no reason
not to apply them to myself, as the people you abused were
certainly no worse than me, and you were certainly no more
dissatisfied with them than you were with me. And here
I saw further evidence of your enigmatic innocence and
impregnability, you would abuse people without reservation
or misgiving, yet you criticized anyone else who used abusive
language, and forbade it.

You intensified your abuse with threats, and these some-
times were aimed at me. I found this one particularly terri-

fying: “PI gut you like a fish” — of course I knew that nothing

33

 

 
 Page 16

worse would follow (as a small child, admittedly, I did not
know that) but it tallied with my impression of your strength
that you would have been capable of it. It terrified me too
when you ran around the table screaming, trying to catch one
of us, you obviously had no intention of catching us but still
pretended, until Mother would eventually step in to rescue us.
As the child’s life had been spared only by your mercy, or so it
seemed, it was to be duly lived out as an undeserved present
from you. The same can be said of your threats concerning
the consequences of disobedience. Whenever I embarked
on something that you disapproved of and you threatened
me with failure, my respect for your opinion was such that
my failure became inevitable, even if I could perhaps defer it
for a while. I lost faith in my own abilities. I became erratic,
doubting. The older I grew, the more I provided you with
evidence of my worthlessness, gradually you really came, in
certain respects, to be right about me. Here I must be careful
not to claim that I only became like this because of you; you
merely intensified what was already there, but you intensified
it greatly, simply because you held so much power over me
and used this power to its full extent.
You set particular store by the use of irony in bringing me
up, it was also especially fitting given your superiority over.
me. You usually reprimanded me like this: “Can’t you do it

this way instead? Isn’t that a bit too much for you? Surely

34

 

Page 16

you don’t have time for that?” or similar. And all of these
questions were accompanied by a spiteful laugh and spiteful
face. You punished me sometimes even before I knew what I
had done wrong. When you particularly wanted to antagonize
me you would refer to me in the third person, as if I were not
even worthy of an angry address; you would say ostensibly to
Mother, but actually to me as I sat there too, something like:
“We simply can’t have that kind of behaviour from our son”
(This produced a counter habit in me: I never dared, or later
never even thought, out of sheer habit, to address you directly
while Mother was present. It was far less dangerous for me
to put questions to Mother as long as she sat beside you, so I
would ask Mother: “How is Father?”, thus protecting myself
from any surprises). Of course, there were times when I agreed
with your extreme irony, notably when its target was someone
else, Elli for example, with whom I had been on bad terms for
years, For me it was an orgy of malice and Schadenfreude when
you referred to her like this at almost every meal: “Look at the
fat cow, she has to sit ten metres from the table”, and again
when you imitated her, in spiteful and exaggerated fashion as
you sat in your chair, without the faintest hint of warmth or
humour, but rather with bitter enmity, as if trying to show
how terribly she offended your sensibilities. How often scenes
like this must have occurred, and how little they actually

achieved. This, I think, was because the extent of your anger

35

 

 
 Page 17

and spite was so disproportionate to the matter in hand, we felt
that your anger could not actually have been caused by such
a trivial thing as sitting so far from the table, rather it must
have been latent in you from the beginning, triggered in this
case purely by chance. Since we were convinced that it would
eventually be triggered anyway, we did not really let it trouble
us, we were also desensitized by your constant threats; little
by little we gradually became virtually certain that there was
no danger of a real thrashing. We became surly, unobservant,
disobedient children, constantly preoccupied with escape,
mostly internal escape. And so you suffered, and we suffered.
In your opinion you were doing no wrong when you stood
there with clenched teeth and that gurgling laugh which had
given me my first idea of hell as a child, and said bitterly (as
you did recently on receiving a letter from Constantinople):
“What a rabble!”

Tt seemed entirely incompatible with this attitude to your
children that you should complain publicly — which you did
very frequently. I admit that as a child (and probably later
too) I was insensitive enough not to understand how you
could ever expect to find sympathy. You were so immense in
every respect, why should our sympathy or even our help be
of concern to you? Indeed you surely would have scorned it,
as you so often scorned us. For this reason I refused to believe

that your complaints could be genuine, and searched for some

36

 

 

Page 17

hidden motive behind them. It was only later that I grasped
how truly you suffered at the hands of your children, but
while under different circumstances your complaints could
still have prompted in me a childlike, open, unhesitating
willingness to help, as things were I could never see them
as anything other than transparent tools of teaching and
humiliation, not very effective in themselves, but with the
damaging side effect, to which I grew accustomed as a child,
that the things I should have taken most seriously would be
precisely those that J did not learn to take seriously enough.
Fortunately there were some exceptions to this, mostly
when you suffered in silence, and your love and goodness
joined forces to succeed in moving me, in spite of all the
obstacles. This was admittedly rare, but it was wonderful.
For instance whenever I saw you exhausted and nodding off
in the shop on hot summer afternoons, elbows on the desk,
or on Sundays when you came running to us breathless in the
fresh summery weather; or once when Mother was seriously
ill and I witnessed you shaking with tears, steadying yourself
by the bookcase; or the last time I was ill and you came silently
to me in Ottla’s room, standing in the doorway and merely
peering round to see me in bed, acknowledging me with a
single considerate gesture of your hand. At times like these
I lay back and cried with happiness, and J am crying again

now as I write these lines.

37

 

 
  

Page 18

You also have a particularly wonderful, very rare sort of
serene, satisfied, approving smile that can makea person truly
happy. I cannot remember any particular occasion on which
you bestowed it on meas a child, but it probably happened at
some stage, I see no reason why you would have refused it to
me then, when I was still innocent in your eyes, besides which
I was your greatest hope. Incidentally, even such friendly
gestures have in the long term served only to intensify my
guilt and make the world even harder to understand.

I preferred to rely on what was real and permanent. In
"order to assert myself a little against you, partly also out
of a sort of revenge, I soon began to observe, collect and
exaggerate all the little absurdities in your behaviour, For
example, how you would be easily dazzled by certain people,
for instance some Imperial Councillor, who for the most part
only gave the illusion of being superior in rank to you, and
how you would go on and on about them (on the other hand
it also hurt me that you, my father, thought you needed such
insignificant confirmations of your worth and bragged about
them so much). Or I observed your predilection for those
crude expressions, which you bellowed at maximum volume
and followed with a laugh that suggested you thought you
had said something particularly splendid, when in reality
it had been only a feeble, uninspired obscenity (this was

at the same time yet another humiliating manifestation of

38

 

 

 

Page 18

your vigour). Of course I made many diverse observations
of this kind; they made me happy, they were a rare cause
for exuberance and laughter, you noticed this sometimes
and grew angry, thought it was spite, disrespect, but I can
assure you, for me it was nothing more than an attempt — an
ineffectual attempt — at self-preservation, they were the sort
of jokes one makes about gods and kings, jokes that not only
are linked toa deep respect, but indeed form an integral part
of it.

Incidentally, you made your own attempts to defend
yourself against me, as befitted our reciprocal situation. You
used to point out how excessively well I lived and how well I
was really treated. Though these observations were correct, I
do not believe that they did me any appreciable good under
the circumstances.

It is true that Mother was boundlessly good to me, but I
could only see her treatment of me in relation to yours, that
is to say, negatively. Mother unconsciously played the cate of
beater in the hunt. Whenever, in some improbable situation,
the way you brought me up might have made me stand
on my own two feet by instilling in me defiance, aversion

or even hatred, Mother would offset it with gentleness and
reasonableness (in the chaos of my childhood she was the
epitome of reason), she pleaded my case and I was driven

back into your orbit, from which I perhaps otherwise would

39

 

 
 Page 19

have escaped to the advantage of us both. At other times
there was no reconciliation, Mother simply protected me
from you in secret, gave me something in secret, allowed me
something, then in your eyes I was again that shady, lying,
guilt-ridden creature that in his worthlessness could only get
through devious means what he thought himself entitled to.
Of course, I grew accustomed to seek by these means even
what I thought I was not entitled to. This served still further
to intensify my feelings of guilt.

It is also true that you hardly ever really beat me. But the
way you screamed and went red in the face, the way you
hastily undid your braces and hung them over the back
of a chair — this was almost worse for me. Imagine a man
who is about to be hanged. Hang him and he is dead, it is
all over. But force him to witness all the preparations for his
hanging and inform him of his reprieve only once the noose
is dangling in front of his face, and you can make him suffer
for the rest of his life. Something else, too, grew out of these
many occasions where, in your clearly expressed opinion, I
dsserved a thrashing but was spared by your mercy — again,
intense feelings of guilt. From every side, I was in your debt.

From the very beginning you reproached me (both in private
and in front of others; you had no idea how this humiliated
me, your children’s affairs were always public) with living an

easy life in peace, warmth and plenitude, all at your expense.

40

 

 

 

 

Page 19

Lam referring here to those remarks that must literally have
become etched in my mind, such as: “When I was no more
than seven I had to push the cart from village to village”. “We
all had to sleep in one room”. “We counted ourselves lucky
when we got potatoes”. “For years my legs were covered in
open sores for want of warm clothing”. “When I was just a
little boy I was sent away to work in a shop in Pisek”.* “My
parents never sent me anything, not even in the army, but still
Isent money back home”. “But in spite, in spite of everything
—my father was still my father. Nobody appreciates that these
days! What do these children know? Nobody's been through
what I have! What child can understand that today?” Under
different circumstances, anecdotes like these could have been
an excellent way of teaching me, they could have given me
strength and encouragement to survive the same trials and
deprivations that my father had endured. But that was not at
all what you wanted, you had taken care to make my situation
quite different, there was never an opportunity for me to
distinguish myself as you had done. Such an opportunity
could only have been achieved by violence and upheaval, I
would have had to break away from home (assuming that I
had had the strength and resolve to do so, and that Mother
for her part had not tried to prevent it by other means). But
that was not at all what you wanted, you called it ingratitude,

self-importance, disobedience, betrayal, madness. So while on

41

 
 |
Id
al

 
  
   
 
    
  

  

Page 20

the one hand you tempted me into it through your example,
anecdotes and humiliation, you forbade it with the utmost
severity on the other, Otherwise, apart from the incidental
circumstances, you would surely have been charmed by
Ottla’s adventure in Ziirau. She wanted to experience the
countryside where you had grown up, she wanted work
and deprivation as you had had them, she did not want to
relax and enjoy the fruits of your hard work, just as you had
been independent from your own father. Were those such
_ terrible aspirations? So far from your own example and
‘caching? Admittedly, Ottla’s aspirations failed ultimately
In practice, were perhaps a little ridiculous, were carried out
too ostentatiously, she showed too little consideration for her
parents. But was she entirely to blame, could you not also
blame her circumstances and particularly the fact that you
and she were on such bad terms? Had she really been (as
you have subsequently tried to convince yourself) any less of a
stranger to you in the family home and business than she was
later in Ziirau? And was it not within your power (had you
only found it in you) to turn that escapade into something
much more positive through encouragement, guidance and
support, or perhaps even simply through tolerance?
In connection with such experiences,

. you used to say in bitter
jest that we had it too easy. But in a sense this was no joke at

all. What you had had to fight for,

we were given straight from

42

 

 

 

 

 
 

Page 20

your hand; but that struggle for an independent life which
was granted to you from the beginning and which, of course,
even we cannot entirely avoid, that is a privilege for which we
are forced to strive belatedly, as adults with the strength of
mere children. J am not saying that this necessarily makes our
situation harder than yours, rather the two are probably equal
(in saying this I do not mean to compare their basic natures),
our only disadvantage is that we cannot use our deprivation
to glorify ourselves or to belittle others, as you did with your
deprivation. Nor do I deny that it would have been possible for
me to have truly enjoyed the fruits of your great and successful.
work, made good use of them and, to your delight, developed
them further, but for our alienation preventing it. As it was, I
could enjoy what you gave me, but only with embarrassment,
weariness, weakness, a sense of guilt. And that is why I could
only ever receive your approbation with beggarly gratitude, I
could never do anything to deserve it.
The next outward result of my whole upbringing was that
I ran away from everything that even remotely reminded me
of you. Firstly the business. As a street shop it should have
delighted me, particularly in my childhood, it was so lively,
lit up in the evenings, I saw and heard so much, could help
here and there, show my skills, but above all I could marvel at
your great talent for business, how you sold things, dealt with

people, made jokes, never tired, immediately knew what to

43

      
   
  
  

  
  
  
 
  

   
  
 

  
 Page 21

do in a difficult situation etc.; even the way you packaged
goods or opened a box was a spectacle worth watching
and the whole thing was, all in all, certainly not the worst
education for a child. But as you came to scare me, gradually
and in every respect, and as I became unable to distinguish
you from the shop, I no longer felt comfortable even there.
Things there that I had initially taken for granted came to
torment and embarrass me, particularly your treatment of
the staff. I do not know, perhaps it was normal for staff to
be treated that way in the workplace (things were certainly
similar during my term at the Assicurazioni Generali* for ex-
ample, I justified my resignation to the manager, not entirely
truthfully but on the other hand not completely deceitfully,
by claiming that the abuse, of which I was incidentally not
the direct target, was unbearable; my home life had left me
too painfully sensitive to it), but as a child I was not concerned
with other workplaces. I saw only you, screaming, shouting
abuse and raging about the shop, something which I could
not believe ever happened elsewhere in the world. And there
was not only verbal abuse, but other sorts of tyranny too. For
example, when you wanted certain goods not to be confused
with others and, to prove your point, sent them flying from
the counter with a single swipe ~ only the blindness of your
rage excused you slightly — and the clerk would have to

pick them up. Or your constant way of talking about one

44

 

 

 

 

 

Page 21

particular tuberculosis-stricken clerk: “Ihe cripple should
hurry up and die”. You called the employees “paid enemies”,
and so they were, but even before they turned against you, you
seemed to me to be their “paying enemy”. This also taught
me the important lesson that you could be unfair; I would
not have noticed it so soon on my own, I was too overcome
with guilt, which led me to convince myself that you were
right; but these people were, in my childhood opinion (later
a little but not very much altered) complete strangers who
nonetheless worked for us and who, for all that, had to live in
continual fear of you. Of course I exaggerated the situation
because I wrongly assumed that you were as frightening to
others as you were to me. If that had been the case, they really
would have been unable to cope; but since they were grown
adults with mostly excellent nerves, they shrugged off your
insults effortlessly and you actually suffered far worse than
they did. For me, however, it made the shop unbearable, it
reminded me all too acutely of my relationship with you:
quite apart from your interest as an employer and quite
apart from your need to dominate, you were so superior as
a businessman to all who ever learnt from you that none of
their achievements could ever satisfy you, and I likewise must
have disappointed you on a continual basis. Because of this, I
could not help but ally myself with the staff, also incidentally

because, through my timidity, I could not understand how

45

 
    

   
  
  
  
   
  
 
 
 
 
   
  
  
  
   
  
 
 
 

 

Page 22

someone could insult a stranger like that, and this timidity
made me want somehow, for my own safety, to reconcile the
staff with you, with our family, for I thought they must be
terribly outraged. In trying to achieve this it was no longer
enough to treat the staff with normal politeness, nor even
with modesty, rather I had to show humility, not only did I
have to greet them at every opportunity, where possible I also
had to decline a greeting in return. And if I, insignificant as
I was, had licked the soles of their feet, it still could not have
made up for the way in which you, the master, attacked them
from on high. My tendency to form this kind of relationship
with other people affected me beyond the shop and into my
future (Ottla demonstrates a comparable, if a less dangerous
and far-reaching phenomenon, in her keen involvement
with the poor for example, in the way in which, to your great
annoyance, she would insist on sitting with the serving girls,
and so on). By the end I was almost afraid of the shop and it
certainly ceased appealing to me long before I started school
and became increasingly distant from it. Furthermore, my
skills did not seem up to the job, since even yours, as you
admitted, were inadequate. You then tried (which moves and
shames me still) to turn my aversion for the shop into some
degree of affection for you, for your work, by maintaining
that I lacked business sense, that my head was’ made for

loftier ideas etc. Of course this contrived explanation pleased

46

Page 22

 
 

Mother, and even I, in my vanity and need, allowed myself to
believe it. Had it really been purely or mostly “loftier ideas”
that had come between me and the business (which I now,
but only now, truly and honestly hate), they would surely
have manifested themselves differently, they would not have
allowed me to drift quietly and anxiously through school and
legal studies, until I ended up behind a civil servant's desk.
If I wanted to escape you, I would have had to escape the
rest of the family too, even Mother. Of course she always gave

me protection, but only in relation to you. She loved you too

" much and was too faithfully devoted to you, for her to be

an independent source of moral support in my longer-term
struggle asa child. Moreover, my childhood instinct was right,
for over the years Mother became even more closely allied
to you; where she had once retained some independence in
her own affairs, ably and quietly, within the narrowest limits
so as not to anger you too much, over the years she began
more and more blindly to accept the way you judged and
condemned your children, more out of emotional sympathy
than rational agreement with you, and especially in Ottla’s
case, which was the most difficult one. Of course, we must
remember what a punishing and utterly exhausting position
Mother held in the family. She slaved away in the shop and
at home, suffered doubly through all the family illnesses, but

most of all she suffered in her role as mediator between us

 
  

47

  
  

Page 23

and you. You always treated her with love and consideration,
but in this respect you spared her no more than we spared her.
We hammered away at her without consideration, you from
your side, we from ours. We only did it to amuse ourselves,
we could not see how it hurt her, we could not see beyond
the war that we waged on you, you on us, and we were
happy to vent our frustration on her. It further damaged our
upbringing that you — of course without being the slightest
bit at fault — punished her instead of us. It even seemed to
justify the otherwise unjustifiable way we treated her. How
she suffered at our hands because of you and at your hands
because of us, not to mention those times when you were in
the right because she was spoiling us, even if this “spoiling”
may sometimes have been nothing but a silent, unconscious
retaliation on her part against your system. Of course, all this
would have been unbearable for Mother, had her love for us,
and her happiness in that love, not given her the strength to
bear it.

My sisters were only partially on my side. Happiest in
her relationship with you was Valli. The closest of us all to
Mother, she submitted to you in much the same way without
it costing her much effort or causing her much harm. But
you accepted her more readily too, despite her relative lack of
Kafka-like attributes, because she reminded you of Mother.

Or perhaps her lack of Kafka-like attributes even suited you;

48

 

Page 23

where there were none, even you could not demand them;
furthermore it relieved you of the feeling that something had
gone astray and required salvaging by force. Besides, you
may never particularly have liked the way that Kafka-like
features manifested themselves in women. Valli’s relationship
with you might have grown stronger still, had the rest of us
not spoilt it somewhat.

Elliis the only one ofustohavealmost completely succeeded
in breaking free of your influence — just what I would least
have expected from her in her childhood. She was such a
clumsy, tired, anxious, morose, guilt-ridden, self-effacing,
spiteful, lazy, greedy, miserly child, I could hardly bring
myself to look at her, she reminded me so much of myself,
she was so greatly influenced by the way you brought us up,
as I was. Her avarice was particularly repulsive to me, since
mine was, if possible, even worse. Avarice is after all one of
the surest signs of deep unhappiness; I was so uncertain of
everything that I could only be sure of possessing what I held
between my hands or lips, or what was at least on its way
there, and it was precisely these things that she, in a position
similar to mine, delighted in taking away from me. But this
all changed when, still in her youth — that was the most
important factor — she left home, married, had children, be-
came cheerful, carefree, spirited, generous, selfless, hopeful.

It is almost inconceivable that you failed to notice this

49

 

 
          

   

  
  
  
 
  
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
  
   

Page 24

change, you certainly did not consider it praiseworthy, you
were so blinded by the resentment you always felt for Elli
and which still remains essentially unchanged, even if it has
become far less acute now that Elli no longer lives with us,
besides which it has been lessened by your love for Felix
and affection for Karl.* Only Gerti* still occasionally has to
suffer for it.

I hardly dare write about Ottla, I know that in doing so
I jeopardize everything I hoped to achieve with this letter.
Under normal circumstances, I mean when she is in no real
need or danger, you have nothing but contempt for her; you
even admitted to me that you think she deliberately causes
you constant grief and anger, and that while you suffer on her
account, she is happy and contented. A sort of devil. What
a monstrous rift there must be between you and her, even
greater than the one between you and me, to engender such
a monstrous misunderstanding. She is so distant from you
that you barely see her any more, but instead see a ghost in
her place. I admit that you found her particularly difficult. I
cannot make complete sense of this very complicated state of
affairs, but in any case here was a sort of Léwy equipped with
the best Kafka-like weapons. I was no real match for you;
you soon disposed of me; all that then remained was escape,
bitterness, grief, inner struggle. You two, on the other hand,

were constantly ready for battle, constantly fresh, constantly

 

 

Page 24

full of energy. A sight as great as it was hopeless. At the very
beginning you were certainly very close, for even today Ottla
is perhaps the purest emblem of your marriage to Mother and
of the power implicit in that marriage. I do not know what put
an end to that happy harmony between father and child, I can
only assume that her situation developed in a similar way to
mine. With you behaving tyrannically, and she demonstrating
a Liwy-like defiance, sensitivity, sense of justice, restlessness,
and all this reinforced through an awareness of her Kafka-
like strength. I probably influenced her too, but hardly
deliberately, rather simply by being there. Moreover, as the
last-born, she entered into a pre-established family dynamic
and was able to form her own judgment from the ample
material already there. I can even believe that she hesitated
to do this for a while, considering whether she should throw
herself at your feet or your opponents’, clearly you neglected
something at that time and pushed her away, otherwise you
would have become a splendidly harmonious pair. Although
I would have lost an ally in this pairing, the sight of you
together would have been rich compensation, and moreover
the immeasurable happiness of finding complete satisfaction
in at least one child would have altered you significantly in
my favour. That, however, is now no more than a dream.
Ottla has no contact with her father, she must follow her own

path like I do, and the additional confidence, self-assurance,

51

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  
  
  
 

  
  
 

   
 
 

  

  
  
      
  
 Page 25

good health, lack of scruples that she has compared with me
makes her even more spiteful and treacherous in your eyes.
That I understand; seen from your point of view, she could
not appear otherwise. Indeed, even she is capable of looking at
herself from your perspective, empathizing with you, fretting
—not despairing, despair is my speciality — about the situation.
Although you often see us together, in apparent contradiction
to all I have said ~ we whisper, laugh, from time to time you
hear us mention you. You see us as insolent conspirators. An
odd sort of conspirators. Admittedly you are a prominent
subject of our conversations, as you have been of our thoughts’
since the very beginning, however, we do not come together
with the intention of plotting against you, but rather to talk
through with one another — in every detail, from all angles,
at every opportunity, from near and far, under stress, in jest,
in sincerity, with love, defiance, anger, revulsion, resignation,
guilt, with all the strength of our heads and hearts — that
terrible trial that hangs over us and separates us from you,
a trial in which you always claim the role of judge although,
at least for the most part (here I admit I may make many
mistakes), you are just as weak and blinded as we are.
Irma’ is a particularly enlightening example in this whole
saga of how you brought people up. On the one hand admit-
tedly she was an outsider, she only entered the business as an

adult, dealt with you mostly as her boss and was therefore

52

Page 25

exposed to your influence in smaller doses, at an age when she
was already capable of resistance; on the other hand she was
also a blood relation, she admired in you her father’s brother,
and your power over her was far greater than that of a boss.
And despite this she, who even in her bodily frailty was so
competent, clever, diligent, modest, trustworthy, selfless,
faithful, who loved you as an uncle and admired you asa boss,
who proved her worth in other posts before and since — never
made you a very good employee. In her relationship with you
she was like another child, of course we helped to push her
in that direction, and the buckling power of your presence
weighed down on her to such a degree that she developed
(admittedly only in your presence and hopefully without the
deeper suffering of a child) a forgetfulness, thoughtlessness,

morbid humour, perhaps even a little defiance as far as she

was capable of it, although here I take no account of her sickly

disposition, general low spirits and the burden of dreary
domesticity that she shouldered. The complex implications
of your relationship with her were summed up by you ina
single, almost blasphemous sentence that nevertheless became
a classic for us, it proved your obliviousness to the way you
treated people: “She died and left me in a real mess”.

I could describe the wider implications of your influence
and my struggle against it, but I would be treading on un-

certain ground, besides the further you moved away from

53

 
  

Page 26

the business and family, the friendlier, more accommodatin ig,
politer, more considerate, more involved (outwardly as well
as inwardly) you became, just like an autocrat who steps
outside his own land, who no longer has any reason to be
tyrannical all the time and can associate affably with even the
lowliest of people. In the group photographs from Franzens-
bad, for example, you stood tall and merry among the surly
creatures, like a king on his travels. Of course even your
children could have thrived on this, had they only been able
to recognize it as children, which was in fact impossible, and
I, for instance, would not have been so eternally confined to
the innermost, strictest, suffocating sphere of your influence,
as I was in reality.

Through this I not only lost my sense of family as you see
it, on the contrary I still had a sense of the family, indeed
a largely negative one, and of inner detachment from you,
which could of course never succeed. But my relationships
with people outside the family suffered perhaps even more
under your influence. You are entirely wrong if you believe
that I do all I can for other people out of love and devotion,
nothing for you or the family out of coldness and betrayal. I
repeat for the tenth time: I probably would have turned out to
be an anxious person in any case, shy of people in general, but
it is a long, dark path from there to where I actually ended

up. (Until this point in the letter I have made relatively few

54

 

 

Page 26

deliberate omissions, but now and later I will have to omit
certain things thatare too hard for me to confess —to you and to
myself. I say this so that you do not believe, should the overall
picture be a little unclear in places, that I lack evidence. On
the contrary, evidence exists that could create too unbearably
crude a picture. It is not easy to find a middle ground here.) It
will suffice in this case, incidentally, to cast our minds back: I
had lost my self-confidence whenever I was in your presence,
had exchanged it for a boundless sense of guilt (I was thinking
of this boundlessness when I once summed it up perfectly in
relation to someone else: “He is afraid that the shame will
outlive him.”). I could not suddenly transform myself when
L came into contact with other people, rather I developed a
deeper sense of guilt towards them, because as I have already
said, 1 felt compelled to make amends for the way that you
had treated them in the business, something for which I felt
jointly responsible. Moreover, you objected secretly or openly
to everyone with whom I associated, and I was obliged to
rectify this too. The mistrust for people in general that
you tried to teach me at work and at home (name a single
person of any importance to me asa child whom you did not
roundly criticize on at least one occasion), and that strangely
did not weigh on you at all (you were strong enough to bear
it, besides which it may purely have been an emblem of your

dominance) — that mistrust, which was never justified in my

55

 
  

Page 27

childlike eyes, as I saw around me only inimitably excellent
people, that mistrust developed within me into mistrust of
myself, and a perpetual fear of all other people. And so in this
respect I was generally unable to save myself from you. You
deceived yourself on this front, perhaps because you truly
were unaware of my involvement with people and assumed,
suspiciously and jealously (am I denying that you love me?)
that I had to compensate for my lack of family life elsewhere,

as it was impossible for me to live like that away from home.

Incidentally, as a child I found one certain comfort in all this,

a comfort in distrust of my own judgment; I told myself:

“You exaggerate, you think of every little triviality as if it

were a great anomaly, the way young people always do.” I
later almost completely lost this comfort, however, when J
came to understand the world better.

T found just as little escape from you in Judaism. Escape
would have been perfectly possible here, or rather, it would
have been possible for us both to find each other in Judaism,
or at least to find a starting point for our union. But what
a version of Judaism you taught me! Over the years I have
viewed it in three different ways.

Asa child I reproached myself, as you reproached me, for
not going to synagogue enough, not fasting etc. I believed I
was wronging not myself but you, and guilt, in ever-ready

supply, consumed me.

 

 

  

Page 27

Later as a young man, I failed to understand how you,
given your negligible commitment to Judaism, could
reproach me for not striving (even for the sake of piety,
as you put it) to show the same negligible commitment. It
really was, as far as I could see, negligible, a joke, not even
a joke. You went to synagogue four times a year, there you
resembled more, to say the least, the indifferent throng than
the few who took it seriously, you patiently went through
the prayers as a formality, sometimes astonished me with
your ability to turn to the passage currently being recited
from the prayer book, incidentally I was allowed, as long as
I was in the synagogue (that was the main thing) to wander
about as I pleased. And so I yawned and dozed my way
through the many hours (in later years I believe I was only
ever that bored again in dancing lessons) and tried to take
as much delight as possible in the few little variations of the
service, such as the opening of the Ark of the Covenant,
which always reminded me of those shooting booths where
a similar box would open its doors if someone hit the target,
only there something interesting would emerge, while here
it was always the same old headless dolls. Incidentally I was
also very scared in the synagogue, not only, as one might
expect, by the close contact with so many people, but also
because you once casually mentioned that even I could be

called upon to recite from the Torah. I dreaded that for

57

 
   
  

  
   
  

Page 28

years, But apart from this my boredom knew no significant
interruptions, the bar mitzvah came closest, but it required
only risible rote-learning, leading to the risible climax
of passing an examination and then, as far as you were
concerned, to other insignificant events, for example when
you were called to the Torah, a purely social undertaking
in my eyes, and one in which you acquitted yourself well,
or when you stayed behind in the synagogue to say prayers
for the dead while I was banished, which, for a long time,
clearly because of my banishment and lack of any deeper
interest, evoked in me the more or less unconscious feeling
that something indecent was going on. That was the state
of things in the synagogue, at home it was, if at all possible,
even more wretched, since worship was limited to the first
Seder™ which developed more and more into a side-splitting
farce, admittedly under the influence of the growing
children. (Why did you have to submit to this influence?
Because you inspired it). Such were the religious beliefs
I inherited from you, the only further addition being the
way you extended your whole arm to point out “millionaire
Fuchs’s sons” whenever they accompanied their father to
the synagogue on High Holy Days.* I did not know what to
do with this inheritance, other than to reject it at the earliest

opportunity; in the circumstances I felt rejection to be the

most pious option.

 

 

DEAREST FATRER

Later still, though, I looked at it differently and understood
why you believed I had spitefully betrayed you in this matter,
as in so many others. You actually had brought some trace
of Judaism with you from that little ghetto-like village
community, it was not much and you lost another fraction of
it during your time in the city and the army, but impressions
and memories from your youth were still just enough to
allow you to live some sort of Jewish life, particularly as you
did not need much help to do that, you had a very strong
sense of your roots and were virtually impervious to religious
scruples on a personal level unless they were closely bound
up with social scruples. Your life was essentially governed by
your unequivocal belief in the opinions of a particular class
of Jewish society and, since these opinions were a part of
your identity, you came to believe unequivocally in yourself.
Here too, there was enough Judaism, but it was too little to be
handed down toa child, itseeped away even as you passed iton.
Your impressions from your own youth were prevented from
reaching the child, partly due to their inexpressible nature and
partly due to your dreaded personality. It was also impossible
to make the child understand, as he observed ail too well out
of sheer fear, that the few insignificant rituals carried out by
you in the name of Judaism, with an indifference befitting
their insignificance, could have a higher meaning. For you

they meant something as small souvenirs from earlier times,

59

  
     
 
 
  

   
   
  
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
  
  
 

Sais

   
  
  
     
   
  

Page 29

and it was because of this that you wanted me to appreciate
them, but as they no longer had any intrinsic worth even
for you, you could only achieve this through persuasion or
intimidation; on the one hand, this could never succeed and
on the other, as you never recognized your weak position
here, it had the unavoidable effect of making you angry with
me for my apparent stubbornness.

This whole thing is, of course, no isolated phenomenon,
something similar happened to a large part of that tran-
sitional generation of Jews migrating into the cities from a
still relatively devout country; this happened automatically
and inevitably, but it added to our particular relationship,
already somewhat acrimonious, a further considerable
degree of pain. Although you, like I, ought to believe in your
innocence on this count, you should attribute that innocence
to your nature and the conditions of the time, not merely to
external circumstances, I mean you should not claim to have
been prevented, by too much other work and strife, from
concerning yourself with such things. You used, in this way,
to turn the fact of your undeniable innocence into an unfair
reproach towards others. Such reproaches are always very
easily refuted, and this instance is no exception. You should
have concerned yourself less with teaching your children a
lesson, than with leading an exemplary life; had your Judaism

been stronger, your example would in turn have been more

60

Page 29

compelling, this is self-evident and once again under no
circumstances a reproach, but merely a defence against your
reproaches. You recently read Franklin’s* memoirs of his
youth. In truth, I deliberately gave them to you to read, not,
as you remarked ironically, because of a short passage about
vegetarianism, but because of the author’s description of his
relationship with his father, and the incidental revelation of
his relationship with his son, for whom the memoirs were
indeed written. Here I do not intend to go into details.

This view of your Judaism received confirmation in
retrospect, when you noticed my increased involvement
with the faith. Now, you have always had an aversion to
every one of my pursuits, especially to the way I develop an
interest in things, and this was no exception. But beyond
that, I might have had reason to hope that you would make
a small exception in this case. After all, the Judaism stirring
within me was born of your Judaism, and it brought with
it an opportunity to forge new relations between us. I do
not deny that, had you shown interest in these things, I may
immediately have become wary of them. It does not occur
to me at all to claim that I am somehow better than you in
this respect. But it was never even put to the test. Judaism
became loathsome to you because of the way it manifested
itself in me, Jewish writings became unreadable, they “dis-

gusted you”. This could have been an insistence on your part

61

i
y
i
|

 

 

zs

“pricy

el ie

 

 

 
  

FRANZ KAPKA

that the only correct version of Judaism was the one you
showed me in my childhood, that there was nothing beyond
that. But the very notion that you could insist on such a thing
was almost unthinkable. Otherwise the “disgust” (apart from
the fact that it applied primarily not to Judaism, but to my
character) could simply have meant that you unconsciously
recognized the weakness of your Judaism and of my Jewish
upbringing, did not want to be reminded of it in any way and
reacted to all reminders with open hatred. Incidentally your
negative esteem of my Judaism was vastly exaggerated; this
Judaism bore your own curse within it, and its development
was determined fundamentally, that is to say fatally, by my
relationships with other people.

Your loathing dealt a heavier blow to my writing and
everything that, even unknown to you, was related to it.
Here J had in fact gained a little independent distance from
you, even if in doing so I slightly resembled a worm, its tail
pinned to the ground under somebody’s foot, tearing loose
from the front and wriggling away to the side. I was to some
extent safe, I could breathe freely; the revulsion that you felt
for my writing was, unusually, a relief to me. Although my
vanity, my ambition suffered at the greeting (that came to be
notorious for us) with which you welcomed my books: “Put it
on my bedside table!” (you would normally be playing cards

when a book came), despite this I was happy on the whole,

62

 

 

Page 30

not only out of rebellious spite, not only out of delight in this
new confirmation of my analysis of our relationship, but on a
much deeper level, since that phrase said to me: “You are free
now!” Of course I was deceiving myself, I was not, or at best,
not yet free. My writing was about you, all I did there was to
lament what I could not lament on your shoulder. It was a
deliberately long drawn-out parting from you, yet although
you instigated it, I was able to choose its eventual direction.
But how little all of that meant! This whole matter is only
worthy of discussion to the extent that it features in my life,
otherwise I would not even have mentioned it, and even
more so because it has dominated my life, as a presentiment
in my childhood, later as hope, still later often as despair, and
it dictated — I might say once again in your image — the few
small decisions I made.

My choice of career, for example. Of course, you gave me
complete freedom to choose in your generous and, in this
case, even patient way. Admittedly too, in this matter, you
did no more than to treat your son in accordance with the
general custom of the Jewish middle class, or at least the
value judgments of this class, to which you attributed such
great authority. A significant role was also played by your
misunderstanding of my character. For you have always
thought, influenced by fatherly pride, by ignorance of who

I was, by the conclusions you drew from my feebleness,

63
  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

    
 

Page 31

that I was particularly hard-working. In your opinion I
spent my childhood constantly studying and my later life
constantly writing. Now, that is not remotely true. Rather
you might say, much less exaggeratedly, that I studied little
and learnt nothing; it is not very surprising that something
of my learning has survived the years, given my moderately
good memory and my not altogether hopeless analytical
ability, but in any case what is left in terms of knowledge,
and especially the firmness of its grounding, is exceedingly
pitiful by comparison with the amount of time and money
spent in the course of an externally carefree, peaceful life,
particularly too by comparison with almost everybody else
I know. It is pitiful, but for me it is understandable. I have
worried, for as long as I can recall, so deeply about asserting
my spiritual existence that nothing else has ever mattered
to me. Our Jewish grammar-school pupils are generally
strange, they display the most unlikely characteristics, but
the cold, barely concealed, unyielding, childishly helpless,
almost ridiculous, wildly self-satisfied indifference of a self-
sufficient but coldly imaginative child is something that I
have only ever encountered in myself, admittedly in my case
it was also the only protection against a nervous breakdown
from anxiety and guilt. I worried only about myself, but I did
so in a great variety of ways. Sometimes I worried about my

health; it started imperceptibly enough, here and there a little

64

 

   

     

   

Page 31

apprehension about digestion, hair loss, spinal curvature etc.,
this escalated in countless gradations, before finishing up
as a real illness. And what was all this? No actual physical
illness. But since I could not be certain of anything, since I
needed new validation of my existence with every passing
second, since I was never in actual, absolute, sole possession of
anything, as only I could determine unequivocally — in truth
a disinherited son — because of all this I became uncertain
even of what was nearest to me, my own body; I grew taller
and taller at an alarming rate and had no idea how to cope
with it, the burden was too heavy, my back grew crooked;
I hardly dared move, let alone exercise, | remained weak;
I was astonished that anything in me still functioned, as if
it were a miracle, for instance my good digestion; this in
itself was enough to destroy it, opening the way for all sorts
of hypochondria, until eventually, under the superhuman
demands of a desire to marry (I shall speak about this later) my
lungs began to bleed, and here the apartment in Schénborn
Palace* — which I needed only because I believed I needed it
for my writing, so that it too is relevant here — may also have
been responsible. So none of this came from working too
hard, as you always imagined.’There were years when, in full
health, I lazed away more time on the sofa than you did in
your whole lifetime, periods of sickness included. Whenever,

frightfully busy, I hurried away from you, it was mostly to go

65
 FRANZ KAPKA

and lie down in my room. The sum total of my achievements
in the office (where laziness is rarely seen and was in any case
kept in check by my nervousness) as well as at home was so
meagre, if you knew the truth of it you would be horrified.
By nature I am probably not at all lazy, but there was nothing
for me to do. At home I was snubbed, denounced, defeated
and although I made an enormous effort to escape and go
elsewhere, that could not really be called work, for it was
an impossible goal that with my poor strength, a few small
exceptions aside, I could not attain.

It was in this state that I was given the freedom to choose my
profession. But was I at all able to make use of such freedom?
Did I still trust in my ability to enter a real profession? My
appreciation of myself was much more dependent on you than
on anything else, for instance any external success. Success
merely strengthened me for a moment, nothing more, your
weight, pulling me down the other way, was always much
stronger. I was convinced I would never even get through the
first year at school, but I succeeded, I was even awarded a prize;
but I would certainly never pass the grammar-school entrance
exam, yet again I succeeded; but then I would certainly fail my
first year at that school, but no, I did not fail, in fact I kept on
succeeding. But this did not give meconfidence, on the contrary,
I became convinced ~ and your disapproving face was formal

proof of this — that the more I succeeded, the worse my eventual

66

 

 

 

 

 

Page 32

downfall would be. In my mind’s eye I often saw the terrible
staff meeting (school is merely the most integral example, but
it was the same with other things all around me) after I had
passed the first year, and in the second after I had passed that,
and in the third ete., how they would assemble to examine this
exceptional, scandalous case, how I, the most inept or at least
the most ignorant pupil, could possibly have managed to creep
my way up into this class, which would of course immediately
spit me out now that all eyes were on me, to the delight of all
those righteous people who were free of this nightmare. It is
not easy for a child to live with fantasies like this. What did
I care about lessons under these circumstances? Who would
have been able to ignite a single spark of real interest in me?
At this crucial age I was interested in lessons, and not only
lessons but everything around me, much in the same way as
a defaulting bank clerk, still employed and terrified of being
found out, is interested in the routine little transactions that he
must still carry out as an employee. Compared with that main
concern, everything else was so insignificant, so distant. Things
continued like this until my final exam, which to a certain
extent I really did only pass through cheating, and then it all
came to a halt and I was free. If I had been preoccupied with
myself back then, despite the discipline of grammar school,
how much more so now that I was free. This meant that I had

no real freedom to choose my career, I knew that, compared

67

 

 
  

Page 33

with my main concern, I would again be as indifferent to
everything as I was to the lessons taught at school, so I had as
soon as possible to find a career that, without wounding my
pride too much, would allow me to indulge this indifference.
Law was the obvious choice. Little rebellious attempts at other
things, spurred by vanity or blind hope, such as a fortnight’s
study of chemistry or half a year of German, served only to
strengthen that essential conviction. And so I studied law,
which meant that in the few months before the exams, even
to such an extent that it damaged my nerves, my mind was
positively living on sawdust, indeed on sawdust that had
already been chewed for me by thousands of other mouths.
But in a certain respect I liked it precisely because of this, just
as in a certain respect I liked my earlier schooling and my later
career as a civil servant, for it all suited my situation perfectly.
At any rate I showed astonishing foresight, even as a small
child I had abundantly clear presentiments about my studies
and career. I expected no salvation from all of this, I had long
given up all hope of salvation.

However, I showed almost no foresight at all where the
significance and possibility of marriage were concerned;
this, the most extreme terror of my life so far, came upon me
almost completely unexpectedly. I had developed so slowly as
a child, these things seemed utterly detached from me, now

and then it was necessary to think about them; but it was

68

 

 

Page 33

not clear that this was to be a permanent, decisive test, and
even the bitterest of all. In reality, however, my attempts at
marriage turned out to be my most hopeful and spectacular
attempts to escape you, and correspondingly their failure was
every bit as spectacular.

I fear, because I always fail in this respect, that I shall here
again fail to make you understand my attempts at marriage.
And yet the success of this whole letter depends on it, for
although on the one hand the attempts brought all my
positive forces together, they also brought together, with a
certain fury, all the negative forces in me that I described
as resulting in part from the way you brought me up, and
that raised a barrier between me and marriage, that is to say
my weakness, my lack of self-confidence, my overwhelming
sense of guilt. Explaining this will be evén more difficult
because J have mulled it all over and over for so many days
and nights that the mere thought of it now confuses me. The
explanation is only made easier by what I think is a complete
misunderstanding of the issue on your part; the task of
slightly correcting such a complete misunderstanding does
not seem too difficult.

Firstly you put my failure to marry in the same category as
my other failures; I would not have objected to that in itself,
providing that you had accepted my above explanation for

this failure. Indeed, it does belong in this category, but you

69

 
 Page 34

underestimate the significance of it and underestimate it in
such a way that, when we discuss it together, we are actually
referring to completely different things. I dare say that in
your whole life you never experienced anything that meant
as much to you as my attempts at marriage did to me. In
saying that, I do not mean you never experienced anything
as important in itself, on the contrary, your life was much
richer, more anxiety-ridden and busier than mine, but it is
precisely for this reason that you never experienced anything
of this sort. It is rather like one person having to climb five
small steps, and another person only one step, but one that is
as high as the first five put together; the former will not only
conquer his five, but hundreds and thousands more, he will
have led a great and very demanding life, but no single step
of his journey will have meant as much to him as that one
first step will have meant to the latter, the step that he, for
all the strength in him, cannot climb, that he cannot scale, let
alone of course progress beyond.

Marrying, founding a family, accepting all one’s children,
supporting them in this uncertain world and even guiding
them a little is, in my opinion, the pinnacle of human
achievement. The fact that so many people seem to succeed
is no proof of the contrary, for firstly not many really do
succeed, and secondly the success of the remaining few is,

by and large, not due to any “action” on their part, rather

70

 

 

 

 

Page 34

it simply happens for them; their achievement in this case,
though it does not reach that pinnacle, is very significant and
very honourable (especially as it is not possible to differentiate
entirely between an “action” and a “happening”). And nor,
ultimately, is it a question of this pinnacle of achievement,
but rather some far-removed yet respectable approximation
to it; after all, a man does not need to fly right into the middle
of the sun, he needs only to find his way into a little place on
earth where the sun occasionally shines and provides some
warmth.

But how was I prepared for all this? As badly as possible.
This is apparent from what I have already said. Where
preparing me directly as an individual and providing the
basic necessities were concerned, you did not seem to interfere
much. And it could not have been otherwise, here the general
sexual customs of our class, our nationality and our time
were the deciding factors. Yet you did intervene even here,
not much, for such intervention presupposes strong mutual
trust and we both lacked this, you intervened long before the
critical time, and not very happily, because our needs were
completely different; something that moves me does not
necessarily affect you and vice versa, something you would
consider innocent, I might consider reprehensible and vice
versa, something of no consequence for you might be the

final nail in my coffin.

71
  

Page 35

Iremember taking a walk with you and Mother one evening,
it was around Josefsplatz* near what is now the international
bank, when I started to talk about these matters of interest in
a stupidly boastful manner, haughty, proud, detached (that
was untrue), cold (that was genuine) and stuttering, as indeed
was normally the case when I spoke with you, reproaching
the two of you for having left me uninstructed, so that my
classmates had had to enlighten me, for having exposed me
to great dangers (here I was lying in my typical shameless
manner to give the illusion of courage, for as a result of
my anxious nature I had no real concept of these “great
dangers” beyond the most routine sexual misdemeanours of
city children), I implied by way of conclusion, however, that
fortunately I now knew everything, that I needed no more
advice and that everything was all right. I had started to
talk about this chiefly because it amused me, at least to talk
about it, then partly out of curiosity and finally also somehow
to avenge myself on both of you for something or other. In
keeping with your usual manner, you reacted very simply,
merely said something to the effect that you could advise me
on how to pursue these things safely. Perhaps it had been
precisely my intention to provoke such an answer, it certainly
tallied with my lascivious nature as a child who had been
overfed with meat and all the good things in life, yet was still

sexually inactive and constantly preoccupied with himself,

72

 

 

Page 35

but I felt such an outward sense of shame at this, or rather I
believed that I ought to have done, that despite my wishes I
was unable to speak with you about it ever again, and I broke
off the conversation with arrogant impudence.

The answer you gave me is not easy to judge, on the one
hand its brutal candour suggests a certain primitiveness, on
the other hand, the unscrupulousness of the lesson it teaches
is very modern. I do not remember how old I was at the
time, certainly not much more than sixteen. For a boy like
me, it was indeed a very strange answer and it illustrates
the gulf between us that this was in fact the first explicit
and comprehensive lesson on life you ever taught me. But
its real meaning, which I understood even then but which I
was not half-conscious of until later, was as follows: what you
were advising me to do was, in your opinion and even in my
own opinion at the time, the filthiest thing imaginable. Your
efforts to ensure I would bring no physical trace of the filth
home were neither here nor there, they served only to protect
you, your house. What really mattered was the way in which
you remained exempt from your own advice, a husband, a
pure man, above such things; this was probably made worse
for me at the time by the fact that it made even marriage
seem indecent, preventing me from applying the information
I had heard about marriage in general to my own parents.

This made you even purer, exalted you even higher. The

73

   

sea

sopermairiy raceme sormesrmeray

 
 Page 36

thought that you could have given yourself similar advice
before you married was completely unthinkable to me. And
so there was almost no trace of human filth left on you. And
yet it was you who drove me down into this filth with your
few frank words, as if I were destined for it. If the world had
consisted only of me and you, an idea that I held very dear,
then all the purity in the world would be embodied in you,
and the filth, by dint of your advice, would be embodied in
me. It was of course incomprehensible in itself that you could
sentence me to such a thing, to me it was explicable only by
old guilt and the deepest contempt on your part. Once again
this dealt a blow, a very hard blow, to my innermost being.
It is perhaps here, too, that our guiltlessness, both yours
and mine, becomes most clear. A gives B a piece of advice
that is frank, in keeping with his approach to life, not very
appealing but widely accepted in contemporary city life, and
that will perhaps even help prevent damage to B’s health.
This advice is not morally very invigorating for B, but
there is no reason why he should not be able to work his
way out of it and repair the damage over the next few years,
incidentally he is not at all obliged to take the advice and in
any case the advice contains nothing which could cause B’s

whole future to collapse on him. And yet this is exactly the

sort of thing that does happen, but only because you are A
and I am B.

   

    

 

  
 
 

Page 36

 

I have a particularly clear overview of this mutual guilt-

lessness because we clashed in a similar way under completely
different circumstances about twenty years later, which was
indeed horrendous but admittedly much less damaging in
itself, for what did I, at thirty-six years old, have left in me
to damage? I am talking about a minor discussion on one
of those tense days after I had told you of my latest plans to
marry. You said something like: “She probably put on some
sort of fancy blouse, as only those Prague Jewesses know how,
and of course you instantly decided to marry her. And with all
possible haste, within the week, tomorrow, today. I just don’t
understand you, you're a fully grown man, you live in the
city, and still you know no better than to marry the first girl
that comes along. Can you really not see the alternatives? If
you're frightened, I'll go with you.” Your words were clearer
and more detailed, but J cannot remember the particulars,
perhaps my eyes went a little blurred, I was concentrating
almost more on Mother who, although she completely agreed
with you, picked something up from the table and left the
room,

You have perhaps never humiliated me so deeply with
words, nor more clearly showed your contempt for me.
When you said similar words to me twenty years earlier, I
might from your perspective have seen some sort of respect

for the precocious city child, who in your opinion was already

75

 

 
 Page 37

fit to be initiated directly into the ways of the world. Today
this consideration could only deepen your contempt, because
the boy, who previously showed considerable courage, has
since stagnated and appears not to have been enriched by any
further experience, only made more wretched by the passing
of twenty years. It meant nothing at all to you which girl I
chose. You had always (unconsciously) held my ability to
make decisions in low esteem and you now (unconsciously)
thought you knew exactly what it was worth. You knew
nothing of my attempts to escape by other means, you could
not therefore know what thought processes had led me
to this attempt at marriage, you could only guess and, in
keeping with your general opinion of me, you imagined me
to have the most loathsome, crude, ristble motives. And you
did not hesitate for a second to tell me as much. The shame
you brought on me by doing this was nothing compared to
the shame that you thought I would bring on your name by
marrying.

Now, where my attempts at marrying are concerned there
is much you can say in reply, and indeed you already have:
you simply could not have much respect for my decision
because I had twice broken off the engagement with E* and
twice reinstated it, after having needlessly dragged you and
Mother to Berlin for the engagement, etc. That is all true, but

how did it come about?

76

 

Page 37

The fundamental idea behind both attempts at marrying
was entirely respectable: to found a home, to gain independ-
ence. An idea with which you sympathize in theory, except
that in practice it was just like that children’s game where
one child holds, even squeezes the other’s hand, shouting as
he grips: “Oh go away, go away, why don’t you go?” This
was certainly complicated in our case by the fact that your
command for me to “go away” was always genuine, only
unknown to you, the strength of your personality carried on
holding me back, or rather holding me down.

Though both girls were chosen by chance, they were
extraordinarily well chosen. It is further evidence of your
complete misunderstanding that you can believe I, anxious,
hesitant, suspicious, could choose a wife on a whim, carried
away by the mere sight of a blouse. In truth both marriages
would have been marriages of convenience, in as far as I
had been completely preoccupied day and night, for years
in the first case, months in the second, with their careful
planning.

Neither of the girls disappointed me, only I disappointed
them both. My opinion of them is exactly the same today as it
was when I wanted to marry them.

Nor is it true that in my second attempt at marriage I
ignored the experiences I had gained from the first, that I was

reckless. The circumstances were so completely different,

77

 

 
 Page 38

the things I had experienced in the first were the very things
that gave me hope in the second, which was altogether much
more promising. Here I do not want to go into details.

So why did I not marry? There were various individual
obstacles as there are with everything, but life is about tackling
such obstacles. The essential obstacle though, unfortunately
quite independent from these particular events, was that I
am clearly mentally incapable of marrying. That is evident
from the fact that each time I resolve to marry, I cannot
sleep, my head throbs day and night, life loses all meaning,
I stagger about in despair. Anxiety is not the actual cause of
this — though owing to my ponderous and pedantic nature I
do suffer countless anxieties, but they have no real influence,
like worms they apply the finishing touches to the corpse,
but the decisive blow comes from elsewhere. We are dealing
here with the general pressure of fear, of weakness, of self-
contempt.

I want to try and explain more clearly: here in this at-
tempt at marriage, two apparently conflicting forces in
our relationship unite with greater force than anywhere
else. Marriage certainly promises the clearest form of self-
liberation and independence. Through it I would have a
family, in my opinion the utmost that anyone can achieve, in
this sense also the utmost that you achieved, I would be your

equal, all the old and continuously self-renewing shame

78

 

Page 38

and tyranny would be consigned to history. That would
certainly be wonderful, but also questionable. It is too much,
it is impossible to achieve so much. It is as if a man were
in prison, and intended not only to escape, which might be
possible, but also and even simultaneously to convert the
prison into his own pleasure dome. If he were to escape,
he could not work on the conversion and if he were to stay
and work on the conversion, he could not escape. If ] want
to gain independence in our own particular unfortunate
relationship, I must do something which, as far as possible,
has no connection with you at all; though marriage is the
greatest thing of all and leads to the most honourable
independence, it is at the same time intimately connected
with you. To try to escape therefore has an element of
madness about it, and every attempt to escape will almost
certainly lead to madness.

Our close relationship is in part precisely what tempts me
to marry. I picture the equality that it would bring about
between the two of us, an equality that you would be able
to understand like no other, an equality that would be so
beautiful because it could make me a free, grateful, guiltless,
upright son, you an untroubled, untyrannical, sympathetic,
contented father. But in order to achieve this, everything that
has ever happened would have to be undone, which means

that we ourselves would have to be erased.

79

L
iB

 

 
 Page 39

But as things currently stand between us, marriage is ruled
out for me because it is your own exclusive domain. Some-
times I imagine a map of the earth laid out and you stretched
diagonally across it. And then it seems to me that I can only
lead my own life in those areas that are neither covered by
your body, nor within your reach. And given the impression
I have of your size, that leaves me with only a few, not very
welcoming areas, and marriage in particular is not among
them.

This very analogy proves that I am notat all trying to accuse
you of hounding me out of marriage by your own example,
as you hounded me out of the business. Quite the contrary,
despite the remote similarities. Your marriage was in many
respects a model marriage for me, a model of fidelity, mutual
aid, number of children, and even when your children grew
up to disturb the peace more and more, your marriage itself
remained unshaken. Perhaps my high ideals of marriage
were based on your example; but my desire to marry was
doomed to failure for other reasons altogether. Notably your
relationship with your children, which is indeed the theme of
this whole letter.

It is thought by some that a fear of marrying sometimes
originates in a fear that your children will one day take
revenge on you for the sins that you committed against your

own parents. This, I believe, has no great significance in my

80

 

 

Page 39

case, for my sense of guilt actually originates in you and is
so imbued with its own uniqueness, indeed this sense of
uniqueness is an integral part of its agonising nature, that any
replication of it is unthinkable. Nonetheless, I must say that
I would be unable to tolerate such a mute, tired, desiccated,
ruined son as myself, as a last resort I would probably run
away from him, emigrate, like you initially wanted to when
you heard of my plans to marry. So perhaps this has after all
influenced my incapacity to marry.

A much more important factor in this, however, is my
anxiety about myself. This can be explained as follows: I have
already implied that in my writing and everything connected
with it, I have made little attempts at independence or
escape, with the smallest imaginable success, they will
scarcely lead anywhere, this has been confirmed many times
for me. Despite this it is my duty, or rather my whole life’s
purpose to watch over these attempts, allow no danger, nor
any potential danger to threaten them while I am capable
of warding it off. Marriage represents just such a potential
danger, admittedly also the greatest potential progress, but it
is enough for me that it represents a potential danger. What
lengths would I be driven to if it were a real danger? How
could I live out a marriage in the perhaps undemonstrable
but always undeniable sense of this danger? Faced with this

possibility I may hesitate, but the final outcome is certain, I

81

i
H
bE

 
 Page 40

must renounce. Hence that old proverb is only very remotely
applicable: that a bird in the hand is worth two in the bush.
My hand is empty, the bush is full and yet — as dictated by the
conditions of battle and the exigencies of life — J must choose
emptiness. I had to make a similar choice when it came to my
career.

The most significant obstacle to my marrying, though, is
the no longer eradicable conviction that in order to keep a
family together, let alone to guide it, I would need to have all
the qualities I had observed in you, all rolled into one, good
and bad, exactly as they are organically combined in you, your
strength and yet your scorn of others, your health and yet a
certain excess, your rhetorical skill and yet your inadequacy,
your self-assurance and yet your dissatisfaction with every-
one else, your worldly wisdom and yet your tyranny, your
understanding of human nature and yet your mistrust of most
people, then those merits of yours unfettered by weaknesses,
such as your diligence, endurance, presence of mind and
fearlessness. In comparison to you I possessed virtually none, or
at least very few of these qualities, how could I dare to dream
of marrying when I saw how even you struggled bitterly in
your marriage, and how you still failed entirely where your

children were concerned? Of course I never explicitly asked

myself this question, nor did I answer it explicitly, otherwise

my common sense would have intervened to overcome the

82

 

Page 40

problem and remind me of other men who are different to
you (an example of one close by, and yet very different to you
being Uncle Richard),* who have indeed married and have at
least avoided crumbling under the pressure, which is in itself a
worthy achievement and would have been more than enough
for me. But I did not ask myself this question as such, rather
I lived it out from my childhood onwards. My first test was
not marriage, but rather various little trivialities; and in every
little triviality you convinced me, through your example and
through the way you brought me up, as I have tried to describe
here, of my incapacity, and what was true of every triviality,
proving you right in every case, had necessarily to be true of the
most important thing of all ~ marriage. Until my attempts at
marriage I grew up more or less like a businessman who lives
from day to day having worries and nasty presentiments, but
not keeping accurate accounts. He makes a few small profits
which, due to their rarity, he always celebrates and exaggerates
in his head, otherwise nothing but daily losses. Everything
is recorded, but nothing balanced. Now comes the need to
balance it all — that is to say, now comes marriage. And with
the large sums that suddenly have to be dealt with, it is as if
there had never even been the smallest profit, as if everything
were one great debt. Marry now, without going mad!

This is how my life has been with you to date, and these are

the prospects that my life holds for the future.

83

 
  

Page 41

You might, when you read my explanation of why I am
afraid of you, reply as follows: “You claim that I make it
easier for myself simply by blaming you for the state of our
relationship, but I believe that, despite apparent efforts, you
make things not more difficult for yourself, but rather much
more profitable. In the first instance you, like me, deny all
guilt and responsibility, and so in this respect our behaviour
is the same. But whereas I openly lay all the blame at your
door, as I believe is correct, you choose to be both ‘over-clever’
and ‘over-sensitive’ and acquit me too of all guilt. You can, of
course, only seem to succeed in the latter (you certainly wish
for no more) and what emerges between the lines, in spite of all
your ‘clichés’ about character and nature and antagonism and
helplessness, is that I have been the true aggressor, while every
action on your part was committed in self-defence. Even at this
point you could be said, by your insincerity, to have achieved
enough, for you have proved three things, firstly that you are
innocent, secondly that I am guilty and thirdly that you are
not only prepared to forgive me out of sheer magnanimity
but, what is more and at the same time less, that you want to
prove and believe for yourself, albeit in contradiction to the
real truth, that I am also innocent. This ought to have been
enough for you, but it is still not enough. You have got it into
your head to claim that you live entirely off me. I admit that

we battle with one another, but there are two sorts of battle.

84

 

 

 

Page 41

That knightly battle in which independent opponents pit their
strengths against each other, each fighting for himself, losing
for himself, winning for himself. And then the battle fought by
vermin, that not only bite but even go as far as to suck blood for
the sake of preserving their own life. Professional soldiers do
this, and so do you. You are incompetent when it comes to life;
but in order to make things more comfortable, less stressful for
you and to dispel your self-reproach, you seek to prove that I
robbed you of your ability to cope and pocketed it for myself.
Why should it bother you now that you are incompetent?
It is after all my responsibility, now you only have to stretch
yourself out and allow yourself to be dragged through life by
me, both physically and mentally. An example: even while you
expressed the desire to marry, you admit as much in this letter,
you wanted at the same time not to marry, but, in order to
save yourself from exertion, you wanted me to help you avoid
marriage, by forbidding it on grounds that the union would
bring ‘shame’ to my name. But that never occurred to me at
all. Firstly, in this as in everything else, I never wanted to be
an ‘obstacle to your happiness’, and secondly I would never
want to hear this sort of reproach from a child of mine. But
did the self-restraint that I exercised in leaving you free to
marry do me any good? Notin the slightest. An aversion to the
marriage on my part would not have prevented it from taking

place, on the contrary, it would in itself have been another

85

i
i
k

 

 

 
  

Page 42

incentive for you to marry the girl, for it would have meant
the successful completion of your ‘attempt at escaping’, as you
put it. And my consent to your marriage did not prevent you
from reproaching me, for you prove that I am in any case to
blame for your failure to marry. F undamentally though, in this
as in everything else, you have only proved to me that all my
reproaches have been justified, and that one especially justified
reproach was still lacking, namely reproach of your insincerity,
your fawning, your feeding off me. If I am not sorely mistaken,
you are feeding off me even with this letter.”

To this I reply firstly that this whole reproach, which can
in part be turned back against you, comes not from you but
rather from me. Not even your mistrust of others is as great
as my own self-mistrust, instilled in me by you. I do not
deny that there is some justification for this reproach, which
in itself contributes new material to the explanation of our
relationship. In reality, of course, things cannot fit together as
neatly as the evidence in my letter, life is more complicated
than a jigsaw puzzle; but with the adjustment that this
reproach brings, an adjustment on which I am neither able
nor willing to elaborate, I have reached something that in my
opinion so closely resembles the truth, that it might comfort

us both a little and make it easier for us to live and die.

Franz

86

 

 

 

Extracts from Kafka’s Diaries

 

 

 
  

 

 

1911

26th August. Tomorrow I am supposed to travel to Italy. This
evening Father could notsleep for excitement and sheer anxiety
about his business, which has made him ill. A damp cloth on
his chest, nausea, difficulty in breathing, pacing up and down,
sighing. Mother is fearful, but finds new consolation in the
fact that he has always been so energetic, he has always coped
with everything, and now ~ I tell her the trouble with the
business cannot last more than another three months, and that
everything will then be fine. He paces up and down, sighing
and shaking his head. He is aware that we cannot take on
his burden or otherwise rid him of it, but even we are aware,
despite our good intentions, of the sad necessity that he must
provide for his family... Through his frequent yawning or his
(incidentally not revolting) nose-picking, Father reassures us
slightly, barely perceptibly, about his condition — even though
he generally never does this when healthy.

31st October. ...In case my father should ever again call me

a bad son, I am writing down now, so as not to forget, that

89

 

 
 Page 44

he, in front of several relatives and without particular reason
— perhaps simply to make me feel small or perhaps because
he means to save me — called Max a “meshuggener ritoch”,*
and that yesterday, when Léwy was in my room, he spoke
with ironic bodily convulsions and contortions of the mouth
of all the strangers that are being allowed into the flat, asking
what one could possibly find of interest in strangers, or why
one should ever enter into such useless relationships, etc...
But I should not have written this down, as I have positively
written myself into a state of hatred for my father, a hatred
for which he has given me no cause today, a hatred which,
at least as far as his statements about Léwy are concerned, is
disproportionately great, and a hatred which is increased by
the fact that I cannot actually remember anything vicious in
the way Father behaved yesterday.

16th October. Exhausting Sunday yesterday. The entire staff
handed Father its resignation. Through kind words and
congeniality, and exploiting his illness, his great presence and
previous vigour, his experience and cleverness, he won them

back, almost all of them, in general and private discussions.

3rd November. ... Lowy — my father’s view: “He who sleeps

with dogs wakes up with fleas.” I could not contain myself

and said something out of order. Whereupon Father replied,

90

EXTRACTS FROM KAFKA'S DIARIES

particularly calmly (admittedly considerably later, after we
had discussed other things): “You know that I am not to
be worked up and must be treated carefully. So don’t come
to me with these things now. I have had just about enough
excitement, more than enough. So spare me such talk.” I say:
“I am doing my utmost to hold back,” and sense in Father,
as always in such intense moments, an underlying wisdom of

which I can only catch the slightest pulse.

5th November. ...I want to write, my head is throbbing. I sit
in my room, surrounded by the clamour of the entire flat. I
hear all the doors slamming, at least their racket spares me
the footsteps going between them, but I can still hear the
oven door banging shut in the kitchen. Father bursts into
my room and out the other side, his dressing gown trailing
behind him, in the next room I can hear ash being scraped
out of the stove, Valli asks into the unknown, through the
anteroom, as if across a Parisian alleyway, whether Father's
hat has been polished yet, this well-intentioned whisper
provokes a scream in réply. The front door is unlatched,
creaking like a catarrhal throat, then opened further with
the brief sound of a woman singing, then shut with a dull
masculine jolt, a most inconsiderate sound. Father is gone,
now begins the more tender, more diffuse, more hopeless din

of the canaries. Much earlier I had considered, but am now

91

 
 Page 45

reminded again by the canaries, whether to open the door a
little, creep snake-like into the next room and, lying on the

floor, ask my sisters and their nanny to be quiet.

14th December. This morning my father reproached me for
not caring about the factory. I explained that I had bought
shares expecting to profit, but I couldn’t contribute to the
work as long as I was in the office. Father continued arguing,
I stood by the window and remained silent. But that evening I
found myself thinking, as a result of our morning discussion,
that I could declare myself very satisfied with my current
position and must only be wary of having all my time free

for literature.

26th December. ...It is unpleasant to listen to Father when

he ~ with endless digressions on the fortunate situation of
contemporaries and, above all, his children — recounts the
sufferings that he had to endure in his youth. Nobody denies
that for years he had open sores on his legs, as a consequence
of insufficient winter clothing; that he frequently went
hungry; that at the tender age of ten, he had to push a cart
from village to village, even in winter and very early in the
morning — but these true facts, even combined with the
further true fact that I haven’t been through all this myself,

do not in the slightest warrant his conclusion that I have been

92

 

   

 

EXTRACTS FROM KAFKA’S DIARIES

happier than him, that the sores on his legs somehow make
him superior to me, nor the assumption he has always made
that I cannot do justice to his former life and finally, that I,
precisely because J have not experienced the same sufferings,
should be infinitely grateful. How happy I would be to hear
him speak uninterruptedly of his youth and his parents,
but it torments me to listen to it spoken in such a boastful
and antagonistic tone. Time and again he claps his hands
together, saying: “Who appreciates that these days? What do
these children know? Nobody’s been through what I have!
Can any child understand that today?”

1912

 

7th January. ...The noise of card-playing could be heard
in the large room, and later the loud, albeit incoherent
conversation which Father usually has when he is feeling
well, as he is today — a conversation that J could only hear
spasmodically above the background noise. Little Felix
was sleeping in the girls’ room, with the door wide open. I
slept on the other side, in my room. The door to my room
was closed, out of consideration for my age. The open door
further demonstrated that they still intended to lure Felix

into the family, while I-had already been shut out.

 
 
   
 Page 46

6th May. ...A recent dream:

I was travelling with my father through Berlin by tram.
Countless turnpikes, standing upright at regular intervals,
painted in two colours and rounded to a blunt point,
contributed to the urban feel. Apart from that the city was
virtually empty, but the concentration of these turnpikes
was considerable. We came to a gate, alighted without being
aware of it, went through the gate. Behind the gate was a
very steep wall, which my father climbed as if dancing, his
legs flying, it was so easy for him. There was a certain lack of
consideration in the way he did not help me, as I could only
ascend with the utmost effort, on all fours, frequently sliding
back again, as if the wall below me had become steeper. It
also embarrassed me that the [wall] was soiled with human
excrement, so that flakes of it clung to me, mostly on my
chest.

T looked down at the filth and ran my hand over it. When I
finally reached the top, my father, who was already emerging
from a building, immediately threw his arms around my
neck, and hugged and kissed me. He was wearing an old-
fashioned, short frock-coat padded like a sofa on the inside,
which was very familiar to me from past memory. “This Dr
von Leyden! What an outstanding man,” he kept exclaiming.
But he had not visited him in his capacity as a doctor, merely

as a man worth knowing. I was slightly scared that I would

94

 

EXTRACTS FROM KAFKA’S DIARIES

have to go inside and meet him, but this was not required.

Behind to the left, | saw a man with his back to me, sitting
in a room consisting entirely of glass walls. It turned out that
this man was the Professor’s secretary, that my father had
in fact spoken only with him and not the Professor himself,
but that he had somehow seen the merits of the Professor
embodied in the secretary, thus entitling him to form a full
judgment of the Professor, as if he had spoken with him

personally.
1914

6th May. My parents seem to have found a nice flat for F and
me; I wandered around aimlessly for an entire afternoon.
Will they also lower me into my grave, after a life made

happy through their care?

19th December. ... Yesterday Father reproached me about
the factory: “You’ve dropped me right in it.” I then went
home and wrote calmly for three hours, aware of the fact
that my guilt, although undeniable, is not as great as Father
claims. Today, Saturday, I did not go to supper, partly for fear
of Father, partly to make full use of the night for work, but I

wrote only one page, and not a very good one at that.

 
 Page 47

1916

19th April. ...1 dreamt recently: We were living on the
Graben near the Café Continental. A regiment was coming
round the corner of the Herrengasse, heading for the
Staatsbahnhof. My father says: “Something like this has to be
seen while one is capable of it,” and swings himself (in Felix’s
brown nightgown, his figure becoming an amalgamation
of both) up onto the window and, with outstretched arms,
splays his legs out on the very wide, steeply slanting window
ledge. I grab him and hold on to him by the two small loops
meant for the cord of his nightgown. To be perverse he
stretches out even further, it takes ail my strength to hold
him. I think of how good it would be if I could rope my feet
to some fixed object, so as not to be pulled down with Father.
This, however, would require letting go of Father, at least
momentarily, which I cannot do. Sleep — especially my sleep

— cannot survive all this stress, and I wake up.

18th October. ...I am descended from my parents, bound to
them and my sisters by blood, I do not feel it in my everyday
life or, as a consequence of this inevitable obsession, in my
specific plans, but deep down I am more aware of it than I
know. Sometimes it moves me to hatred, a glimpse of the

parental bed at home, the dirty bedclothes, the carefully

96

 

EXTRACTS FROM KAFKA'S DIARIES

laid-out shirts can make me vomit, can turn me inside out,
it’s as if I wasn’t fully born yet, as if I repeatedly came into the
world afresh, from this dull life in this dull living room, as if
I must seek to validate myself there over and over again, as
if I were indissolubly bound to these repulsive things, in part
if not wholly, the bond is still attached to my feet, preventing
them from walking, from escaping the original formless
mush. That is how it is sometimes.

But at other times I remember that they are my parents
after all, necessary sources of strength and elements of my
own being, belonging to me not only as an obstacle but also
as a part of myself. Then I want them as one wants all the
best things: if I, in all my malice, vulgarity, selfishness and

lovelessness, have always shuddered at the thought of them

and indeed still do so today, because one cannot break these

habits, and if they — Father from one side, Mother from the
other — have, again out of necessity, almost broken my will,
then I wart at least to think them worthy of this. I have been
betrayed by them, but cannot defy the laws of nature without

going mad — hence more hatred and nothing but hatred.
1917

21st September. ...A dream about Father: In front of a

‘ small audience (Frau Fanta was there, to give you an idea),

97

 
 Page 48

Father talks publicly for the first time about an idea for social
reform. Father wants this select audience — especially select
in his opinion — to devise the propaganda for this idea. On the
surface Father’s language is much more modest, in that he
only asks the party, once they know all the details, to supply
him with the addresses of people interested in the idea, who
could then be invited to a large public assembly in the near
future. My father has never had anything to do with any of
these people before, this leads him to take them excessively
seriously, to put on a black suit jacket and present the idea
with extreme precision, with all the hallmarks of a dilettante.
Those present realize from the start, although they were not
prepared for this speech, that this is merely an old, worn-out
idea from long ago, presented with all the pride of originality.
They let Father feel this. But the latter was ready for this
objection, so, with splendid confidence that the objection is
without substance, although it seems to have tempted even
him several times, he presents his case even more emphatically,
with a subtle bitter smile. Once he has finished, it is apparent
from the generally disgruntled murmur that he has failed to
persuade them of the originality and practicality of his idea.
Not many of them will be interested in it. In spite of this he
finds the occasional person who, because of his good nature
or perhaps because he is acquainted with me, supplies him

with some addresses. My father, wholly unperturbed by the

98

EXTRACTS FROM KAFKA’S DIARIES

general atmosphere, has put away his lecture notes and taken
out some small piles of pre-prepared white slips to note down
the addresses. I can only hear the name of a Court Counsellor
Stryzinowski, or something similar.

Later I see Father sitting on the floor and leaning against
the sofa, his usual position when he plays with Felix. Startled,

I ask him what he’s doing. He’s thinking about his idea.
1921

25th October. ...My parents were playing cards; I sat with
them on my own, a complete stranger; Father said I should
join in or at least watch; I somehow found an excuse not to.
What did this refusal, an act I had repeated many times since
childhood, signify? This invitation offered me the chance to
live a social, even to a certain extent public life, by joining in I
would have been able to fulfil their expectations, not well but
tolerably, playing would not even have bored me that much
— yet I declined. In light of that, I am wrong to complain that
I was never swept up in the current of life, that I never got
away from Prague, was never exposed to any sport or trade,
and so on —I would probably always have declined the offers,
just as I had the invitation to play. Only pointless things got
through to me, the law degree, the office, then later further

pointless things, such as gardening, carpentry and the like,

99

i
i

 
  

 

Page 49

in doing these things I behaved like someone who throws
a needy beggar out and then plays the role of benefactor in
private, giving alms from his right hand to his left.

But I always declined, probably out of general weakness,
and in particular weakness of will, I only came to understand
this relatively late. I used to interpret this tendency to decline
as a good sign (seduced by the generally great hopes I had for
myself), today only a vestige of this generous interpretation

survives.

2nd December. Writing letters in my parents’ room. The
signs of decline are unimaginable. Recently the belief that I
was defeated by Father as a small boy and have since been
prevented by pride from leaving the battleground, throughout

all these years, despite enduring defeat over and over again.

100

 

Extracts from Kafka’s Letters

 
  

I almost never quarrel with my parents, who are now in
good health and good spirits. My father gets annoyed with
me only when he sees me sitting at my desk too late, because
he thinks I am working too hard. My health is better than it
has been for a few months, at least it was at the beginning of
the week... Life at home has been almost entirely peaceful.
to Max Brod, 1910

What I am doing is simple and self-evident: in the city, in my
family, in my profession, in society, in love (you can put this
first if you like), in my relations to the community as it stands
or as I would wish it to be, in all these I have failed, and
moreover —I have observed this clearly — in a way that no one
else around me has. It is that fundamental childlike idea: “No
one is as bad as me”, which later, when corrected, only causes
new pain. But here we are no longer dealing with badness
and self-reproach, rather with the patent psychological fact of
failing — nonetheless this idea persists and will persist. I don’t
want to boast of a suffering that I have never experienced, my

suffering seems in retrospect (as it has always seemed at every

little stage along the way) all too undeservedly slightcompared

"103

 
  

 

 

 

Page 51

to the pressure it has had to withstand — nonetheless it was too
great to be borne much longer, or if it was not too great, it was
too meaningless. (In this murk, it is perhaps understandable
to look for meaning.) The most immediate escape, perhaps
from childhood onwards, was not suicide, but the thought of
it. In my case I was prevented from committing suicide not
by any cowardice, but merely the thought, which likewise
ended in meaninglessness: “You, who are incapable of doing
anything, you think you can do this? How dare you think
that? If you were capable of killing yourself, you wouldn’t
really have to any more.” Etc. Later, as I slowly gained more
insight, I stopped thinking of suicide.

: to Max Brod, 1917

-.-may I ask you at any rate to arrange the stories in the order
I specified. May I further ask you to insert a dedication page
with the inscription “To My Father”.

to Kurt Wolff Verlag, his publisher, 1918

Ever since I decided to dedicate the book to my father, I am
anxious for it to appear soon. Not that this would appease
my father; our antagonism is too deeply rooted, but at least J
would have done something; although unable to emigrate to
Palestine, I would at least have traced the route on the map.

to Max Brod, 1918

104

 

EXTRACTS FROM KAFKA'S LETTERS

When I was younger, whenever I committed some apparent
stupidity which actually stemmed from a fundamental flaw
in my nature, my father used to say, “Just like Rudolph!”
comparing me to an utterly ridiculous stepbrother of my
mother’s, an indecipherable, over-friendly, over-modest, sol-
itary and yet almost garrulous man. Fundamentally I had
hardly anything in common with him, my critical father
aside. But the painful repetition of the comparison, the almost
physical difficulty of avoiding at all costs a route I had not
even intended to take, and finally my father’s persuasiveness,
or if you like, the curse he put on me, made me start at least
to resemble this uncle.

to Robert Klopstock, 1921

-.-1 might have stayed if I had seen that my father needed
me in any way. But yesterday that was not the case at all. His
affection for me dwindled day by day (no, on the second day
it was at its greatest, but after that it diminished constantly).
And yesterday he could not get me out of the room quickly
enough, although he compelled my mother to stay. A new,
especially wearing period of suffering now begins for my
mother, even if everything carries on as well as it did before.
For while until now my father, gripped by terrible memories,
has considered staying in bed a blessing, he now finds that

lying still has become a torture (he has a scar on his back,

105
  

Page 52

which has always made it virtually impossible for him to lie
still for long periods; in addition, each change of position is
difficult for his heavy body, then there is his irregular heart,
the bulky bandage, the renewed pain when he coughs, but
above all his restless, helpless and benighted mind; the way
I see it, he now faces a torture greater than any he has faced
before; this torture has become apparent since his condition
improved, yesterday he gestured with his hand behind the
nurse, whom I find wonderful, as she left, a gesture that in
his language could only mean “Bitch!” And this state of his
(which perhaps only I can grasp in all its bare awfulness) will
go on for another ten days at the very least, and whatever of
it can be taken out on my mother will be taken out on her to
its full extent. Ten such day-and-night vigils now await my
poor mother!

to Max Brod, 20th July 1922

What Herr Weltsch reports is hardly compelling, he takes
it for granted that all fathers love and praise their sons. But
in my case what reason could there be for my father’s eyes
to light up? A son incapable of marriage, unable to pass
on the family name; pensioned off at thirty-nine; occupied
with nothing but his weird writing, which deals only with
his salvation or damnation; loveless; unbelieving, unable

even to pray for salvation; tuberculosis-stricken, and as his

106

 

EXTRACTS FROM KAFKA'S LETTERS

father quite properly sees it, having brought the sickness
upon himself, since no sooner was he released from the
nursery for a moment, than he sought out that unhealthy
room at the Schénborn Palace, despite his total incapacity for
independence. A son to rave about.

to Max Brod, late July 1922

107

 
 Note on the Texts

The translations have been based on the following German
texts: “Brief an den Vater’ in Nachgelassene Schriften und Frag-
mente IT (Frankfurt am M.: S. Fischer, 1992-93), Gesammelte
Werke, ed. Max Brod (Frankfurt am M: S. Fischer, 1953) and
Tagebiicher 1910-1923 ed. Max Brod (Frankfurt am M.: S.
Fischer, 1951).

Notes

p.7, Und verstehe... Advokatenbrief: Kafka, Briefe an
Milena (Frankfurt am M.: S. Fischer, 1952), p. 80.

p.7, Du... 2u haben: Kafka, ‘Brief an den Vater’ in
Nachgelassene Schriften und Fragmente I (Frankfurt am M.:
S. Fischer, 1992-93), p. 152.

p. 8, Du wirktest... musstest: Ibid., p. 147.

p. 8, Upbringing... marriage: Anz, Thomas, ‘Afterword’ in
Reppin, Karen, Letter to the Father (Prague: Vitalis, 1998),
p. 84.

Pp. 9, neglecting... son: Robertson suggests that it was typical for
Jews of Hermann Kafka’s generation to neglect their religious
traditions as they tried to integrate into non-Jewish society in
Prague: Robertson, Ritchie, Franz Kafka: Judaism, Politics and
Literature (Oxford: Clarendon, 1987), p. 5.

108

 

Pp:

p-

v3

v7? 'D

NOTES.

9,anxiety... sexuality: Anz, Thomas, ‘Afterword’ in Reppin,
Karen, Letter to the Father (Prague: Vitalis, 1998), p. 84.
10, Brod published... stories: Brief an den Vater was orig-
inally published in ‘Hochzeitsvorbereitungen auf dem Lande
und andere Prosa aus dem Nachlass’ in Gesammelte Werke,
ed. Max Brod (Frankfurt am M.: S. Fischer, 1953).

11, Ich... weg: Kafka, Das Urteil (Frankfurt am M.: 8.

Fischer, 1974), p. 17.

. 11, weil... Gans: Tbid., p. 15.

ll, Sie hat... verstehn: Kafka, ‘Brief an den Vater’ in
Nachgelassene Schriften und Fragmente II (Frankfurt am
M.: S. Fischer, 1992-93), p. 205.

11, Georg... Kafka: Kafka, Tagebiicher 1910-23, ed. Max
Brod (Frankfurt am M.: S. Fischer, 1951), p. 297.

12, an identity... Anz: Anz, Thomas, ‘Afterword’ in
Reppin, Karen, Letter to the Father (Prague: Vitalis, 1998),
pp. 84-87.

18, Franzensbad: A spa town in the Czech Republic.

18, Ottla’s: The youngest of Kafka’s three sisters.

19, Robert Kafka... Karl Hermann: Robert Kafka was Franz
Kafka’s cousin, with an admirable physique and success-
ful career. Karl Hermann was Franz’s equally successful
brother-in-law (married to Franz’s eldest sister, Elli).
Hermann Kafka made no secret of his opinion that Franz

was inferior to these relatives.

109

 

 

 
  

Page 54

p. 20, Léwy: Lowy was the maiden name of Franz’s mother,
Julie Kafka,

p. 20, Uncles Philipp, Ludwig and Heinrich: Three of Hermann
Kafka’s brothers. .

p. 21, Valli: The second eldest of Franz’s three sisters.

p. 22, pavlatche: A balcony running along the edge of a house
on the first floor or above, inside the exterior wall (Czech).

p. 24, Pepa: Ottla’s husband (Josef David).

p. 25, meshugge: “Mad” (Yiddish slang).

p. 27, Léwy: A friend through whom Franz made his first
acquaintance with the Yiddish theatre. Franz’s diary
entries show that he felt a rare spiritual connection with
Léwy.

p- 27, proverb... dogs and fleas: A western proverb: “He who
sleeps with dogs wakes up with fleas”.

p. 30, Felix’s: The son of Elli Kafka and Karl Hermann;
Hermann Kafka’s grandson.

p. 31, her: The “she” to which Hermann Kafka refers is never
explicitly identified.

p. 41, Pisek: A town situated 100 km south of Prague near
Hermann’s home town of Wossek.

p. 44, Assicurazioni Generali: Italian insurance firm where
Kafka spent an unhappy year (1907-08). The schedule pre-
vented him from writing, he termed the job a “Brotberuf”

(one done solely for the sake of earning a living).

110

 

 

 

NOTES

p. 50, Karl: Karl Hermann, see note to p. 19.

p. 50, Gerti: Gerti Wasner, with whom Franz had a ten-day
love affair in 1913.

p. 52, Irma: One of Hermann’s nieces (Ludwig’s daughter).

p. 58, Seder: The Passover Seder, a symbolic feast held at
home on the first and second evenings of Passover.

p. 58, High Holy Days: A sacred period observed during the
first ten days of Tishri (the seventh month of the Jewish
calendar), between Rosh Hashanah and Yom Kippur.

p. 61, Franklin’s: Benjamin Franklin, whose autobiography
partly inspired Kafka’s novel Amerika.

p. 65, Schénborn Palace: A building, now the United States
Embassy in the Mala Strana district of Prague.

p. 72, Josefsplatz: A piazza near the Kafkas’ home in Prague.

p. 76, F: Felice Bauer, twice engaged to Franz. The pair met
in 1912 and maintained an intensive correspondence until
Franz was diagnosed with tuberculosis in 1917 and the
affair ended.

p. 83, Uncle Richard: One of Franz’s uncles on his mother’s
side.

p. 90, meshuggener ritoch: “Hot-headed madman” (Yiddish
slang).

Mi

 
 | ' Acknowledgements

The publisher would like to thank William Chamberlain
/ and Alexander Feest for their care in the editing of this
| work,

:
i

4 |

aq

:

;

7 |

u i:

FE

 

 
